---
date: "2020-03-30T00:00:00Z"
authors: [robdyke]
tags:
    - Third Year
    - Dissertation
title: Hacking the Networked Society.
toc: true
---
Introduction.
=============

The dynamic between free-software and open-source is often misunderstood
by social and political theorists. As a consequence it is also
under-theorised within socio-political theory. In this paper, I show how
philosophies of free/libre, open-source and commons regimes have
engendered new forms of sociopolitical consumption and new political
economies of meaning. My emphasis on the interplay between the local and
the global/structure and agency, shows new ways of ‘thinking’ the
cosmopolitan, sedimented in the interconnected networks of the technical
age. My thesis is concerned with our present moment of opportunity. I
believe that positive possibilities for politics and political economy
are presented in the philosophies of free/libre, open-source and commons
regimes. In this paper I will demonstrate the contribution of these new
sociopolitical categories and the new politics that is being made public
because of free/libre hacking.

My thesis explores two themes: networks and movement. I recognise in the
literature around social movements, global politics and government a
similar interest in networks that develops in tandem with advances in
physical and technical networks, such as transportation, computing or
utilities. I, too, am interested in networks in both social and
technical senses of the concept. According to Parsons the network
concept was attractive to social movement and public policy theorists of
the 1950 and 1960s because this model was flexible enough to describe
the fluid and complex interplay between both the formal and informal
political and social relationships that condition political culture.[^1]
During the 1980s the network concept was developed by a number of French
sociologists. I have been particularly interested in the work of Bruno
Latour in this area. He is associated with the Actor-Network-Theory
(ANT), a sociology which claims that “modern societies cannot be
described without recognizing them as having a fibrous, thread-like,
wiry, stringy, ropey, capillary character that is never captured by the
notions of levels, layers, territories, spheres, categories, structure,
systems. \[ANT\] aims at explaining the effects accounted for by those
traditional words without having to buy the ontology, topology and
politics that goes with them.”[^2]

In terms of global society, the network metaphor has been widely
deployed in the field of international relations, economics,
anthropology and socio-political geography. Most prominent is the
geographer Manuel Castells whose seminal work *The Rise of the Network
Society*[^3] considers the social and political dynamics created by the
flows of people, goods and services, and capital around the world in
terms of networks. More recent examples of the use of the network
concept can be found in the ethnographies of ,[^4] the
political/cultural research of ,[^5] and the socio-political geography
of .[^6] The network concept has helped these authors to move beyond the
‘ontologies, topologies and politics’ of world systems theorists,
hyper-globalist free-marketeers and models of dependency and
development.

Most crucial in the ANT approach is that this sociology includes the
material; that is to say it recognises “the facts manufactured by
natural and social sciences and the artefacts designed by
engineers.”[^7] Some may be critical of this approach, fearing a
technological determinism or a cyborg future. However, I agree with
Benkler who, in arguing that strict technological determinism[^8] is
false, states that “different patterns of adoption and use \[of a
certain technology\] can result in very different social relations.”[^9]
Benkler finds wealth in the network and not in nations, as Adam Smith
did. His argument in *The Wealth Of Networks* considers both the
technological and social aspects of relational (re)production in
networked society.

The closely related ideas of free/libre, open-source and commons regimes
have developed in a similar time-frame to the network concept. These
ideas have developed symbiotically with the rise of networks in the
technological sense too, most crucially the global
information-computation network, the internet. Computer hackers and
political activists Richard Stallman and Eric S. Raymond along with
lawyer Laurence Lessig are the people most strongly associated with
free/libre and open-source philosophies and commons regimes,
respectively.[^10] These individuals are recognised as pioneers in their
areas and their work is widely cited. Stallman’s work is focused on
articulating and developing the free/libre philosophy and curating
several ‘constitutional’ documents. For Raymond, amateur anthropologist
and ‘accidental revolutionary’, it is the socio-economic manifestation
of free/libre philosophy as open-source in a networked society that is
of importance. In his book he explores what he perceives as a shift from
organisational hierarchy, which he describes as a Cathedral, to the
contrasting horizontal networks of a Bazaar. Lessig’s work focuses on
the problematic relationship between culture and property in advanced
capitalist societies, concentrating on commons regimes.

A second aspect of my dissertation is concerned with movement and
movements, again considering social and technical aspects. I am
interested in social movements, for example the socio-political
organisations considered by New Social Movement (NSM)[^11] theorists,
and in technical movement, considering the flows of signs and symbols in
transmission. Both movement and movements are considered through the
rubric of global networked society. The groups and communities around
free/libre and open-source philosophies and commons production regimes
form what has been described by many as a New Social Movement. I am
interested in the movement of concepts and practices from free/libre and
open-source groups to other social movements and political organisations
in our networked society.

My approach in this thesis is to pay attention to both the
interconnectedness of nodes in networks, be they biological or
techno-sociological, and the movement of signs and symbols in those same
networks. I have taken a hyper-networked attitude in my thesis. There is
nothing but networks or, to use Latour’s words, “there is no *aether* in
which the networks should be immersed.”[^12] In this sense the network
concept is both reductive and relativist. Yet, when considered in
parallel with the political philosophy of free/libre, open source, and
commons ideals, the network concept takes us towards an ontology that is
relational and not reductive. I acknowledge the atomic, i.e.
indivisible, nature of each individual being. Yet, my ontology of this
being also recognises the multi-dimensional inter-connections, that is
to say the networks that each individual is a node in.[^13]

My dissertation has four parts. Firstly, I pose the question ‘Who
Governs in a Networked Society?’, considering the effect of global
dynamics on modern conceptions of subject, governance and sovereignty.
The post-modern history of our contemporary geospatial and political
present presented by Hardt and Negri in *Empire*[^14] has been a
critical influence on my thoughts on networks and movement in this
regard.

Freedom and openness are two central concepts in hackerism and the
contemporary social movements it has influenced. In the second section
of this paper I explore in depth the political philosophy of free/libre
and open source ideas that have arisen from hacker culture. In examining
the epistemology of these emerging redefinitions of freedom and openness
I demonstrate the challenges and opportunities they present to the
corresponding dominant liberal notions of the same terms.

The third section of this paper engages with the question of production
and reproduction under the conditions of ‘communicative capitalism’[^15]
and the ‘positive possibility’[^16] presented by free/libre and
open-source conceptions of the same.

The “contemporary proliferation of political spaces and the multiplicity
of democratic demands”[^17] needs a new politics, a politics that works
at the global and the local level, the universal and the particular. New
relationships of interconnectedness between people, communities,
identities, artifacts, locations and events need to be reflected in the
political culture of our institutions. What are the dynamics of these
relationships? How are these new political movements creating spaces in
our networked society? Furthermore, with “advocates of freedom in the
new digital society \[…\] decried as pirates, anarchists,
communists”[^18] by the those who dominated the imperial/industrial
economy - those who have the most to loose - the stakes are clearly
high. We are witnessing, as Moglen announces in his work *The
dotCommunist Manifesto*, “the arrival of a new social structure, born of
the transformation of bourgeois industrial society by the digital
technology of its own invention.”[^19] This networked remixing and
retransmission of free/libre philosophy, directed back at the forces of
capital in liberal democracies that (re)produced and conditioned its
emergence presents, perhaps, the challenges and the new opportunites for
radical political communities and political economy. The effects of
free/libre, open source and commons in transmission will conclude my
dissertation.

Who Governs in a Networked Society?
===================================

Dahl asked ‘Who Governs?’ and found a gradual shift from oligarchy to
pluralism.[^20] Barry’s *Political Machines*[^21] was concerned with
‘governing a technological society’…This section, then, develops both of
these lines of enquiry and can be conceived as ‘Who Governs in a
Networked Society?’ I am concerned with the present and the shift from
pluralism to networked society. My focus here is to consider
‘interconnectedness’, revealing the relationships in and between complex
social systems. I contend that ever increasing complexity and ever
greater plurality developing in tandem in the political, economic, and
cultural spheres has two parallel consequences. First, the
depoliticisation of sites government and second, the politicisation of
areas of the social world previously outside of the scope of government.
This has two implications for political communities. First, with the
depoliticisation of government comes increased disconnection of politics
from its community. The links between governors and governed becomes
weaker and other interests can expand into this political space. Second,
the politicisation of aspects of the social world creates new political
communities and new political activities, destabilising established
governmental structures.

The network metaphor, associated with sociologist Antony Giddens[^22]
and geographer Manuel Castells[^23], is a rhetorical framework for
considering the complexity of the interconnectedness of contemporary
cosmopolitan cultures. This metaphor has, in Barry’s assessment, become
a “critical term in contemporary political and economic life…associated
with a broad range of political opinion, and deployed in association
with what might appear to be quite contradictory political
strategies.”[^24] The strength of this metaphor is its ability to
describe both the moment and the movement of the social world, the
situated actors and their agency. The complex and often contradictory
relationships of human social existence are not obscured by deploying
this concept. Just as some aspects of the social world are hierarchical
and regulated, and some are rhizomatic and anarchic, the metaphor of the
network draws attention to these two aspects. Most recently the term
network has become closely associated with information and
communications technologies, especially with the internet - the prefix
*inter-* highlights again my theme of connectedness, of ‘being among’.
“However” as Parsons councils us to remember, “against this is the
weakness that the metaphor is highly diverse in its use and
interpretation.”[^25] To clarify my use of this concept then as it
relates to the question of “Who Governs in a Network Society”, I am
denoting the complex formal and informal inter-relationships of
communication and power in the context of contemporary technologically
mediated social exchanges.

I find the network society metaphor significantly more sophisticated
than the ‘globalisation thesis’. This is because a network is local at
all points and global only by association and interconnection. The
network metaphor is universal in that it is social.[^26] A further
reason for not resting my argument on globalisation is that this notion
is frequently grounded in the empirical reality of the boundaried
nation-state. “This epistemology which starts out with society as a
given, consisting of so many closed, bounded entities…contained entities
in interaction with an equally contained society \[was\] modelled on the
state, with its clear boundaries vis-à-vis other entities.”[^27] Yet,
this is precisely where these models fall down - the functional and
reductionist primacy of the nation-state “can not capture the increasing
complexity of reality in their apparatus; that is, *complex in relation
to earlier assumptions.*”[^28] In contrast the ‘networked society’
epistemology does not start out with nation-states and society, rather
it reflects the increased complexity of interactions in relation to
earlier models of society.[^29] This description of contemporary world
society reflects the stabilising and destabilising, territorialising and
deterritorialising tendencies of global flows in political, economic,
legal and social networks, transmuting individuals and communities,
associations and corporations, states and state-like actors.

It is this transmutation that is of critical interest to a number of
writers who argue that this shifting of the traditional markers of
certainty of the global social order denotes not a quantitative change,
but a significant qualitative change in global interactivity. I am
positing here a decline of the nation-state vis-à-vis the emergence of a
cosmopolitan and networked society; yet this is not the whole story - I
am concerned here not only with the decline of traditional governance in
a networked society, but also with the politicisation of areas of the
social world previously outside of the scope of government.

Thinking first then about the depoliticisation of government in the
networked society. I perceive that the previously contained polity of a
given nation-state has been cross-cut as the network modality of global
society diminishes the containers of imperial sovereignty. The world
has, as Paul Virillio describes, been turned inside out like a
glove.[^30] The global is now inside, no longer ‘out there’, elsewhere.
Geospatial boundaries such as the nation-state can no longer be the
centre of our contemporary political and economic order. Rather, these
local structures have been pushed to the outside; sovereignty is now
inside, pushing outwards, a centrifugal force. He writes “…the pips are
no longer inside the apples, nor the segments in the middle of the
orange: *the skin has been turned inside out*. The exterior is not
simply the skin, the surface of the Earth, but all that is *in situ*,
all that is precisely localised, wherever it may be.”[^31] This is a
reorientation of political geography of as great a significance as the
Copernican revolution.

Modernity’s conceptions of zonal time and delineated borders are
reshaped by the immediacy and ubiquity of transnational networks, both
electronic and physical. The physical distance between the *real cities*
of London and Baghdad remains the same as in the imperial age. Yet, our
contemporary relationship to that same distance has altered radically.
The distorting effect of contemporary high speed and large scale
movements of symbols over seemingly vast expanses of space at a
time-warping velocity necessarily tends to the concentration and
centralisation of power.[^32] For Virilio, the complex interplay between
the power concentrated in the *real city* and that in the *virtual city*
causes the imperial politics of the former to give way to a
deterritorialised metropolitics of a universalising and totalitarian
character.[^33]

For Hardt and Negri this real/virtual dichotomy is a catalyst of a
spatial-temporal reformulation of sovereignty leading to a total
networked interdependence in *Empire*.[^34] This new supranational
sovereignty, *Empire*, arises from a “shift in contemporary capitalist
production and global relations of power…to bring together economic
power and political power, to realise, in other words, a properly
capitalist order.”[^35] The paradigm of *Empire* emerges positively from
the “definitive decline of the sovereign nation-state\[s\], by the
deregulation of international markets, \[and\] by the end of
antagonistic conflict among state subjects.”[^36] *Empire* is a mixed
paradigm of supranational sovereignty based on rights and the
realisation of these rights through inter-networked complex systems.
*Empire* tends towards “governance without government” which further
problematizes my initial question. This does not lead, according to
Hardt & Negri’s analysis, to a power-vacuum, rather to the very
depoliticisation of politics and the politicisation of the social world
that I am concerned with in.

These two takes on contemporary globality from Virilio and Hardt & Negri
each describe the depoliticisation of modern government and the site of
government, the nation-state, and find the cause to be the diminishing
sovereignty of each. In our networked society governments of
nation-states are now one-actor-amongst-many within their notional
territory, rather than the sovereign power that the modern International
Relations ‘realist’ paradigm of ‘black-box sovereignty’ holds.[^37] In
reality the sovereign decisions of governments are overturned by
transnational quasi-governmental organisations such as the World Trade
Organisation, local jurisprudence is rewritten because of a judgement by
an international court, peoples national ‘commons’ are enclosed as a
conditionality of international financial or political support.

New social movements are another example of such actors in our networked
society.[^38] These movements are diverse in support, objectives and
strategies. The annual gatherings of NSMs at the World Social Forum
(WSF) and the World Economic Forum (WEF) demonstrate fantastic abundance
of nodes and associations in the network, from independent and voluntary
sector organisations, to trades unions, from grassroots organisations,
to international trade confederations, trans-national business,
philanthropists and other non-state actors.[^39] Most crucially the WSF
and the WEF demonstrate the organising and mobilising power of these
networked movements. The rhizomatic character of these actors
contributes to the destabilisation of the hierarchical centralised
structure of the state. The causes of these new social movements are the
new political spaces in our networked society.

Herein lies a critical paradox, demonstrative of current hegemonic
interest-group in our networked society, and leads us closer to
understanding ‘who governs’. When an aggregation of NGOs concerned with
ecology or poverty mobilise to protect the extinction of an ecosystem or
to prevent mass-starvation, national and transnational governmental
structures appear to tense up, disrupting flows of information and
restricting action. The heavily policed, proscribed protest zones and
the dividing security fences for G8 / WTO meetings, or the political
‘long grass’ of cross-party investigative commissions are two examples
of this. Conversely, the capitulation of national and central banks to
transnational financial business interests during the present ‘credit
crunch’ demonstrates how these same governmental structures can rapidly
mobilise action to protect the interests of capital.

While NSMs may not been able to hold the state hostage to their
interests in the same way that private capital does, these movements can
and do mobilise, again through networks, hundreds of thousands of
activists for campaign objectives. Forty years on from the social change
brought about by the movement of people on the streets; the peace
movement, the student movement, the civil rights movement: what hopes
are there for social change from New Social Movements in our global
networked society?

For Hardt & Negri the discourse of New Social Movement theory has “done
a great service by insisting on the political importance of cultural
movements against narrowly economic perspectives that minimise their
significance.”[^40] However, they contend the post-materialist basis of
New Social Movements has been accepted uncritically, that is to say NSM
discourse “perpetuate\[s\] narrow understandings of the economic and the
cultural” by failing to take into consideration the “increasing
indistinguishability of economic and cultural phenomena.”[^41] Therefore
social movement discourse needs to develop new frameworks capable of
addressing this tendency towards the convergence of economic and
cultural phenomena in a networked society. Free/libre, open-source and
commons conceptions recognise this convergence and, I argue, offer a
rich contribution to NSM discourse. This is an avenue I continue to
explore in a later section.

Several theorists of network culture argue that the increasing
transnational mobility of both individuals and symbols in a network
society should challenge us to think again about other dimensions of
politics. The work of Appadurai in exploring “the image, the imagined,
the imaginary…the imagination as a social practice”[^42] in a networked
society considers one such dimension. He argues that “the imagination
has become an organised field of social practice, a form of work (in the
sense of both labour and culturally organised practice), and a form of
negotiation between sites of agency (individuals) and globally defined
fields of possibility.”[^43]

Appadurai’s transnational ‘mobility without moving’, of identities and
cultures in transmission, is made possible by the ever expansive
‘building out’ of the infrastructure of global networks, interconnecting
the social world. The interaction of global flows of images, identities
and cultures in the networked society adds further complexity to the
constitutive effect of images, the imagined, the imaginary. The question
of ‘Who Governs’ is further problematised, too. When the identity of
each individual in any given polity is, if not constructed, then at
least influenced by these global flows, that polity itself is
destabilised from within. The extreme plurality of contemporary liberal
societies tends towards ‘governance without government’ as a remedy to
this destabilisation.[^44] This manifests itself in two ways. The first
can be seen in the institutions of government in the establishing of
bi-partisan committees or agencies at arms length of the state, and
therefore from the democratic process, depoliticising governance in
pursuit of third-way politics. The second aspect of ‘governance without
government’ is more a counter-weight, a response; here we see NGOs/NSMs
as powerful aggregations of individual interest, operating as the moral
exclamation in resistance to the first depoliticisation. The site of
representation and resistance is now global and networked. Conditioned
by this, these movements are their own network and the network extends
the movement.[^45]

How then are we to understand political struggle when the site of
representation and resistance is now global and networked? The most
crucial characteristic of the network society, as described by Hardt, is
that “no two nodes face each other in contradiction; rather, they are
always triangulated \[…\] by an indefinite number of others.”[^46] This
means that political struggle in our networked society is no longer
directly antagonistic, yet neither is it passive. The resistance and
activism movements organised within networks “displace contradictions
and operate instead a kind of alchemy, or rather a sea change, the flow
of the movements transforming the traditional fixed positions; networks
imposing their force through a kind of irresistible undertow.”[^47]

These social processes of depoliticisation / politicisation are global.
As Castells describes the cyclical events…“societies evolve and change
by deconstructing their institutions under the pressure of new power
relationships and constructing new sets of institutions that allow
people to live side by side without self-destroying, in spite of their
contradictory interests and values.”[^48] The shifting nature of power
in a networked society is amplified and accelerated as the plural and
contained polity of the imperial age gives way to the networked society.

I began this paper asking ‘Who Governs’. In journeying beyond the
waining imperial order into the politics of the networked society we
have seen the destabilisation and deterritorialisation of the site and
agent of government, the nation-state, and recognised the distributed
and diffuse nature of power in our networked society. I have considered
how the same destabilising effects of global networks have had an affect
on the identity of the individual, the subject of sovereignty. The
problem of ‘Who Governs in a Networked Society?’ has become more
complex, provoking more questions. Two goals emerge clearly from this
discussion, the articulation of a new ‘network aware’ ontology and an
account of politics in a network society. Both are needed in order to
begin to frame and answer to the question ‘Who Governs’.

The Free/Open Community.
========================

The networked meshing of hackers, artists and activists has made public
free/libre, open-source and creative-commons concepts.[^49] This section
will consider the hacker identity and hacker social and cultural
relations. I posit that increasing contact with f/los & creative-commons
artifacts, technologies and economics and the wider dissemination of
f/los & creative-commons memes is raising popular consciousness of
several emerging redefinitions for concepts such as freedom, property,
production and ownership. Freedom and openness are two central concepts
in hackerism and the contemporary social movements it has influenced.
This section examines critically the political philosophies of hackerism
in order to reveal the meaning of these emerging redefinitions of
freedom and openness and the challenges they present to the
corresponding dominant liberal notions of the same terms.

To hack is to play, to learn, to survive.[^50] The hacker supports
his/her own being through the application of his/her individual
characteristics in relation to his/her social and material conditions
and gains pleasurable satisfaction in doing so. As MacKenzie Wark puts
it in *A Hacker Manifesto*, the hacker “produces the possibility of
production, the possibility of making something of and with the world -
and of living off the surplus produced by the application of abstraction
to nature - to any nature.”[^51]. The hacker disposition is demonstrated
in the real, lived lives of humans and the development of all human
civilisations. What I am suggesting by ascribing these characteristics
to all humans qua human is that the hacker is the innate modality of
humanity. Hacking, according to Wark, discovers “the nature of nature,
its productive - and destructive - powers. This applies as much in
physics as in sexuality, in biology as in politics, in computing as in
art or philosophy. The nature of any and every domain may be hacked. It
is the nature of hacking to discover freely, to invent freely, to create
and produce freely.”[^52]

To hack is also to subvert and resist. The desire to hack the
information society emerges negatively, in opposition to the challenge
of increasingly rapid enclosure of the immaterial and cultural commons
and against the dislocation from history and society that virtual and
networked property relations effect. Indeed, as both Wark and Himanen
have argued, it is the hacker who is capable of answering the property
question in capitalist societies by proposing an “alternative spirit for
the network society”[^53] creating “new kinds of relation, with
unforeseen properties, which *question the property form itself*”[^54].
This presents a challenge to the dominant spirit of contemporary
advanced capitalism. The hacker proposes free production and free access
in contrast to the private property of capital. I will return to these
new kinds of relationships later.

Modern freedom, the liberty of contemporary liberals, emerged
negatively, as a revolution against the dominant absolutism and
authority of the pre-modern period. The freedom of free/libre also
emerges negatively, a revolution against the widespread practice of
enclosure of technologies and the encroachment of enclosure in the
academy. In *Revolutions OS*[^55] Richard Stallman, founder of the Free
Software Foundation and computer hacker, describes his hostility the to
enclosure of the ‘tools of his trade’, in this case, software, in the
guise of ‘intellectual property.’[^56] He felt his was being forced to
“sign a promise you won’t share \[software\] with anybody else.” He
continues…

> “And to me that was essentially a promise to be a bad person, to
> betray or cut myself off from society, from the cooperating community.
> So, I just wasn’t going to do that. I felt this is wrong. I am not
> going to live this way.”[^57]

This led Stallman and others to develop and share free and open tools.
This work began in the 1980s under the banner of The GNU Project[^58]
and led to the foundation of the Free Software Foundation (FSF).
Stallman’s political and legal work is part of the foundational
philosophy of the free/libre and, later, open source movements.

The freedom Stallman and the FSF espouse in the Free Software Definition
(FSD)[^59] is free-as-in-freedom, that is to say positive freedom:
‘free-as-in-speech’ not ‘free-as-in-beer’, i.e. *gratis*, no charge. The
four freedoms of the FSD are:

-   Freedom 0 - The freedom to run the program, for any purpose

-   Freedom 1 - The freedom to study how the program works, and adapt it
    to your needs. Access to the source code is a precondition for this.

-   Freedom 2 - The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your
    neighbour.

-   Freedom 3 - The freedom to improve the program, and release your
    improvements to the public, so that the whole community benefits.
    Access to the source code is a precondition for this.[^60]

Stallman’s reasoning behind this radical stance is evident in the title
of his collected essays *Free Software, Free Society*.[^61] He askes
“what kind of rules make possible a good society that is good for the
people in it?”[^62] The FSD goes some way to answering that question.
The FSD describes “the freedoms that enable people to form a
community.”[^63] The definition seeks to protect an individuals’ “right
to cooperate with other people and form a community.”[^64] Stallman’s
point is clear: “if you don’t have all these freedoms \[in the FSD\],
you’re being divided and dominated by somebody”[^65] Some hackers, such
as Hill and Coleman, contend that the “four freedoms” of the FSD are
“based in and representative of an extreme form of anti-discrimination
resistant to categorisation into the typical “left, centre and right”
tripartite political schema.”[^66] Yet free/libre is not completely
resistant to categorisation. I contend that the ‘freedom’ of free/libre
is based on an appeal to rights, an exclamation of a right of
self-determination and self-selection of a community and of property.
Therefore, in many respects, the definition of the “freedom” ideal-type
for free/libre is markedly liberal and individualistic in ontology and
political economy.

The FSF is, however, only one voice among the multitude of f/los
hackers, artists and activists; the radicalism of the FSD is only one
expression of hackerism. The free/libre philosophy in transmission, as
one set of symbols among many in a networked society, can be found in
different practical articulations. That is to say that by “recalibrating
the broad meaning of freedom outlined in the FSD to align with their own
philosophies and politics…groups perceive \[f/los\] as a model of
openness and collaboration particularly well suited to meet their own
goals.”[^67]

Here the second part of the f/los acronym emerges,
*open-source*.[^68]Open-source can be read as simply a technology
development methodology that co-opts the advantages of free-software
development - principally freedoms 1 and 3, open access to the
source-code - while playing down its freedom principle. Open-source can
also be described as a social movement. The ‘cause’ of this social
movement is the adoption of open-source practices; its strategy is the
neutralisation of free-software, ‘recalibrating the broad meaning of
freedom’ as put forward by Stallman in the FSD, in order to become more
business-friendly. There is a third reading of open-source which shows
its political implications. Opening the source code requires an attitude
of openness towards modification, duplication and redistribution.
Open-source, therefore, becomes a metaphor for transparency, for
accountability, for democracy; a point to which I will return. Openness
necessitates and configures new social relationships and creates new
political spaces.

Building on the central motifs of the networked society, the information
economy and contemporary organisational theory, Raymond muses on the
phenomenology of open-source in a number of essays, collectively
published as *The Cathedral and the Bazaar*.[^69] He notes a shift from
hierarchical models of organisational, that he refers to as ‘the
Cathedral’, to a more ad-hoc horizontal organisation model that he calls
‘the Bazaar’. The Cathedral model symbolises the paradigm of industrial
production, the competing industrial giants of the 20th century, and the
Bazaar model symbolises the paradigm of open-source production in a
networked society. There are other parallels that can be drawn from his
observation. The centralised and hierarchical Cathedral model can be
viewed as analogous to the waining structures of modern government that
are being destabilised and deterritorialised by the rise of an
open-source networked society paradigm, Raymonds’ rhizomatic Bazaar
model.

Openness conditions new social relationships and practices with new
technologies in a new political space, the networked society of the
Bazaar. For Anderson the dynamic co-development of human societies and
technologies conditions the social order.[^70] The ‘nation’ is an
imagined community manifested in ‘states’; the emergence of this
political category in the 19th century is closely related to the spread
of technologies that increased inter-personal communication in
vernacular languages. The global networks that have extended and
accelerated communications in our contemporary world have facilitated
the multiplication of imagined communities which now scale globally. The
idea of ‘community’ is frequently evoked in f/los discourse and most
f/los activity takes place within a group, with disparate and dispersed
members. Hacker communities are the archetype of a networked community.
The role of ‘the community’ in maintaining and distributing knowledge
and in inculcating a good f/los civic values is central to the hacker
ethos.

I contend that the networked communities and the political cultures they
condition provide useful examples for positive changes to our social
order and practices. Many different New Social Movements have co-opted
the symbols and practices of free-software as well as deriving benefits
from the free software produced by hackers. An example of f/los in
transmission to social-political activism, which is frequently
presented, is IndyMedia.org. This is “ a collective of independent media
organisations and hundreds of journalists offering grassroots,
non-corporate coverage. IndyMedia is a democratic media outlet for the
creation of radical, accurate, and passionate tellings of truth.”[^71]
The openness of open-source fits with the radical transparency of this
network of movements and the free/libre software produced by hackers
sits easily with the broadly anti-capital stance of IndyMedia.

There are other more mainstream examples of the implementation of
open-source methods at the organisational level, the use of free/libre
software tools at a functional level and the general adoption of the
principles of collectivism, active and open participation, and consensus
decision-making and sharing through the organisation. The emergence of
‘social source’ may be defined narrowly as the “marrying \[of\] open
source software development with social service and social change
applications”[^72], or, more, broadly as the marrying of open-source
principles and free/libre production and distribution with the express
goal of social change. The ‘civic hacking’ of the mySociety organisation
embodies in every way the positive socio-political potential of f/los,
building technological tools to open up governmental activity and
reinvigorate democracy.[^73]

So, in summary, I have sketched the transition from hierarchy to
rhizome, from the monopolistic monolithic structures of the industrial
age to the distributed, diverse peer-nodes of networked society. There
are further questions to ask: of a future f/los society of individuals
participating in communities, producing and socially sharing with each
other? Rhizomatic democratic networks overcoming the tyranny of both
structure and structurelessness? What of the tendency towards
transnational cosmopolitan ‘governance without government’? Before
returning to the challenges for the contemporary political order, I will
discuss the hack of the dominant economic system presented by free/libre
philosophy.

Hacking Communicative Capitalism.
=================================

In the previous sections I considered the networked society paradigm,
the philosophy of free/libre and the practices of the open-source
movements. I now turn to explore how a free/libre political economy of
social production and reproduction might challenge the dominant liberal
‘free-market’ political economy of late-stage capitalist market
economies.

The dynamic between free-software and open-source is often misunderstood
by social and political theorists. As a consequence it is also
under-theorised within socio-political theory. For example Terranova’s
*Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age*[^74] has but a few
notes on ‘Software: freeware & open-source’ but none on free-software.
This is a disappointing omission because it is an opposition to, indeed,
the political act of resistance to, enclosure that created the
free-software philosophy in our information age. As Prug observes in his
examination of the ‘political act’ of free/libre activity, Hardt and
Negri manage two references to the open-source movement in
*Multitude*.[^75] Terranova and Hardt & Negri, perhaps willingly, omit
the origins of open-source in free-software and as a result miss the
challenge to capitalist property rights that free-software presents. To
address these failings, in this section I consider questions of
production and reproduction under the conditions of ‘communicative
capitalism’[^76] in search of ‘positive possibilities’[^77] presented by
free/libre and commons conceptions of the same.

In *Empire* Hardt and Negri, like Marx before them, demonstrate that
capital has an expansive character. Just as the hacker sees no boundary
to what may be hacked, capital similarly has no boundaries, expanding
into culture, science, and sex. The expansion and increasing
sophistication of production possibilities, created from nature by
hacking, necessarily increases the sophistication of the capitalist
system. The contemporary economic paradigm has been variously described
as a digital economy, an information economy and a weightless economy.
Yet I think that Dean’s concept ‘communicative capitalism’ most
accurately describes the complexity of this conjuncture, by properly
retaining a reference to ‘captialism’!

Dean’s term highlights the economic reconfiguration of communication,
referring to the networked movement of information and the production of
affect, in a technologically mediated society.[^78] In conceiving of
capitalism as communicative in this way, Dean brings to the foreground
the social and technical aspects of informational capitalism in
networked society. By social I am referring to the affective dimension
of production and reproduction, taking a biological turn similar to
Hardt and Negri in their use of Foucault’s concept of biopower.[^79] The
‘biological turn’ can thought of as a “techno-scientific
reconceptualisation of life”[^80] away from the hierarchical structures
and the centralisation of power of modernity’s oligopolistic Cathedral
model of organisation and production, towards more ad-hoc, rhizomatic
network conceptions, such as the Bazaar.

By technology, like Appadurai, I am referring to technology high and
low, both physical and informational technologies. Similarly, Barry
demonstrates that global regimes, such as ISO certifications and
international ‘intellectual property’ regulation are equally
technological as more conventional understandings of technology, such as
equipment and scientific knowledge.[^81] Dean’s term ‘communicative
capitalism’ reflects this understanding of technology. It reveals the
multiple sites of contestation and diverse technologies of mediation in
“rhizomatic communications networks that are themselves biopolitical,
generative, productive, of capital, of subjectivity, of life
itself.”[^82]

Crucial to my argument here are the concepts of abstract labour and of
immaterial production. These post-workerist terms move beyond the
over-determined political subject of the industrial proletariat and
describe the biopolitical nature of production and re-production under
communicative capitalism.[^83] Using these categories, we can see that
all collective labour is channelled and structured within the logic of
capital.

The informatisation of cultural labour and production, and of that
information then becoming property under the conditions of communicative
capitalism, tends towards the increasing indistinguishability of
economic and cultural phenomena. The publishing of creative works as
commodities and the digital distribution of these works blurs the
markers of the industrial production paradigm. From abstract labour and
immaterial production similarly abstract property forms emerge, such as
‘intellectual property’ and patents, accompanied by copyright regimes to
protect these new property forms. With the modern site of rights, and of
rights protection, diminished in our networked society the defence of
the rights of the holders of these new property forms becomes
increasingly problematic. The battle for protection of these abstract
property forms becomes global, with communicative capitalism
accelerating the expansion and normalisation of transnational structures
of ‘governance without governing’, such as the World Trade Organisation
(WTO), the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) and the
Organisation Internationale de Normalisation (ISO).[^84]

The WIPO understand ‘intellectual property’ as referring to “creations
of the mind: inventions, literary and artistic works, and symbols,
names, images, and designs used in commerce.”[^85] For Stallman and the
FSF, “the term “intellectual property” carries a hidden assumption -
that the way to think about all these disparate issues \[copyright,
patents, trademarks\] is based on an analogy with physical objects, and
our ideas of physical property.”[^86] Johnson is critical of the FSF
position, insisting that the “word ‘intellectual’ is used as a prefix to
‘intellectual property’ precisely to distinguish it from material or
real property.”[^87] This definitional argument doesn’t necessarily
require resolution, as it is serves me here just to highlight the
problematic relationship between culture and property in advanced
capitalist societies. If culture is understood as art, science, code,
the radical diversity and interdependence of all human knowledge, then
the enclosure of knowledge, its commodification as exchangeable
property, deprives humans of access to it.

The hegemony of liberal political economy models in the realms of
technology and culture is demonstrated by the spread of international
patent protection and ‘intellectual property’ law. The radicalism of
free/libre concepts in transmission to non-software realms, particularly
to virtual and abstract labour, but also to cultural production in
general, have created the revolutionary abstractions of copyleft, a hack
of contemporary capitalism’s notion of copyright. It has also created
creative-commons, a hack which institutionalises a opening dynamic of
sharing against the closure of patents and licensing.[^88] Copyleft and
the creative-commons subvert the regimes of copyright and ‘intellectual
property’, reusing the main symbols of the latter pair of concepts to
make public a new logic.[^89]

The free/libre hacks of copy-left and creative-commons are based on an
appeal to the rule of law, demonstrated by the constitutional nature of
the Free Software Definition and the codification of expressions of the
FSD in various licenses.[^90] The appeal to the rule of law of much of
free/libre discourse demonstrates the neo-liberal character of
free/libre. How does this mean we should understand free/libre’s first
principle, freedom? For Hardie, the freedom espoused by the FSF in teh
FSD is a freedom “bound intimately with the logic of open democracy and
with free and open markets.”[^91] On this reading, the political economy
of free/libre, is subversive only because it appears counter-intuitive.
That is to say it appears paradoxical within the axioms of the
capitalist market to produce only to then give away what is produced.

Prug’s work proposes a broader reading of free/libre philosophy as
radical hack of the regime of rights in general. His approach
demonstrates a true positive possibility in the free/libre hack of
communicative capitalism. By hacking rights in favour of egalitarianism
over meritocracy, the property rights central to liberal capitalism are
changed from the substantive ‘right to’ and the normative ‘right of’
property to a ‘right in’ property, which is both substantive and
normative. As Prug argues, “Stallman re-conceptualised the idea of
rights to encourage \[a\] volunteer, co-operative and decommodified
society with the notion of shared wealth.”[^92]

Influenced by the openness of free/libre philosophy the idea of Open
Capital[^93] re-conceptualises other logics central to communicative
capitalism in a radical hack of the terms ‘profit’ and ‘loss’. In a
departure from the “competitive economy based upon shareholder value and
unsustainable growth results from a transfer of risks outwards, and the
transfer of reward inwards,”[^94] Open Capital neutralises the conflict
created by that centrifugal/centripetal strategy, by hacking ‘profit’
and ‘loss’ to ‘reward’ and ‘risk’, as defined by all participants in the
network, to result in a mutually satisfactory exchange of value from the
productive activity.

In conclusion, free/libre presents opportunities for reconfiguring the
logic(s) of communicative capitalism. Now I return to the political
question of organisation and resistance, of the wider translation of the
free/libre hacks of political categories and concepts.

Hacking a Free/Open Politics.
=============================

The “contemporary proliferation of political spaces and the multiplicity
of democratic demands”[^95] in our networked society needs a new
politics, a politics that works at the level of the global and the
local, the universal and the particular. New relationships of
interconnectedness between people, communities, identities, artifacts,
locations and events need to be reflected in the political culture of
our institutions. What positive benefits can free/libre and open-source
in transmission to our wider society bring to politics? How are we to
move beyond the individualist ontology of liberalism and a politics
dependant on capital? What hope is there for a new ontology of
interdependence, a way of being among?

I have outlined changes in political culture that the adoption of
open-source principles of collectivism, participation and consensus
decision-making by organisations and institutions have produced. I have
also considered the reconfiguration of economic activity through the
liberating free/libre hack on property rights. In this section I will
bring these threads together, imagining a free/libre open-source society
which shares, and shares widely, the wealth of networks, grows open
communities and strengthens democracy. No longer can free/libre and
open-source be dismissed as ‘merely metaphorical’ or utopian. As van den
Boomen & Sch<span>ä</span>fer point out, “there is more at stake than
just a vague metaphor for a transparent, democratic and non-private
constitution. Of course, notions of ‘freedom’ and ‘openness’ appeal
strongly to the social imagination, and this can easily result in
utopian daydreaming.”[^96] Let us recall Appadurai here, reminding us
that the imagination is a necessary part of any innovation, that
‘imagination is a social practice’, both a form of work, and a form of
negotiation between sites of agency and globally defined fields of
possibility.[^97]

I argue that the relational and constructive ontology of the hacker and
free/libre and open source ideas are beginning to displace the dominant
liberal *homo economicus*, the rational utility-maximising consumer of
communicative capitalism and the protestant work ethic associated with
Weber.[^98] This reemerging *homo socialis* recognises his/her
historical and social situatedness, both of which *homo economicus* is
emphatically encouraged not to reflect upon by the propagandistic and
manipulative efforts of communicative capitalism’s individualistic and
ahistorical modes of thought.

The network society deconstructs modernity’s institutions and constructs
new institutions that reflect the dynamics of new power relationships.
Free/libre is a radical hack of the institution of rights, disrupting
and reconfiguring the power relationships of property and demanding new
politics relevant to the networked society. I’m not going to quibble
with the liberal basis of much of the hacker ontology and the free/libre
political philosophy. I’m all for free, autonomous individuals solving
their own problems in relationship to their material conditions, adding
to the sum of human knowledge. It is the logic of capital that
reconfigures this knowledge as property and wields property as power. A
politics for the networked society need not reject the symbols of
liberal economics, and certainly must not reject the values of
democracy. Yet it must move beyond the structuralist epistemology of the
nation-state as the container of politics.

In *Multitude*, Hardt and Nergi outline four interpretations of either a
challenge or contribution to democracy from the globalisation of
capital.[^99] On the ‘left’ of the political spectrum, the social
democrat sees global capital as an obstacle to democracy and in response
strengthens the democracy of a people through the nation-state and uses
this site to regulate capital. The liberal cosmopolitan perspective
recognises a contribution to democracy from globalisation and in
response strengthens the democracy of the people through global
citizenship. On the ‘right’, the neo-liberal response favours the
globalisation of capital, viewing this as inherently democratic. While
the ‘traditional values conservative’ response, similar to that of the
social democrat, seeks to retreat behind national borders. I agree with
Hardt & Negri that “none of these arguments \[…\] seem sufficient for
confronting the question of democracy and globalisation.”[^100] They
place their political project, the global democracy of the multitude,
outside this categorisation.

Capitalism’s crucial contingency is the principle of liberty, which is
commonly understood as the protection of private property through
regimes of ‘property rights’. The anti-globalisation stances of the
social democrat and the ‘traditional values conservative’ each uphold
the regime of property rights against global democracy by strengthening
the state / capital relationship. While the pro-globalisation stances of
our cosmopolitan liberal and neo-liberal again uphold the regime of
property rights, this time using global democracy to form a supra-state
/ capital relationship.

Open-source is firmly within Hardt & Negri’s categories as markedly
liberal in terms of its pro-globalisation and pro-democracy stance.
Indeed open-source in and of itself is not anti-capital. Free/libre on
the other hand is outside these categorisations: it is radical. It is
anti-capital because it hacks (subverts) the dominant property rights
regime of capitalism. It is pro-globalisation and pro-democracy in as
much as it is radically free, open and egalitarian.

It is certainly true that much of free/libre and open-source discourse,
like NSM discourse, “perpetuate\[s\] narrow understandings of the
economic and the cultural”[^101] by failing to take adequately consider
the increased mixing of economic and cultural phenomena. To a certain
degree, free/libre, open-source and creative commons concepts are all
“various forms of social contestation and experimentation, all centred
on a refusal to value the kind of fixed program of material production.”
On the other hand, recalling my earlier argument for a reading of
open-source as a social movement to further the adoption of open-source;
free/libre, open-source and creative commons have all ‘sold out’ by
voluntarily channelling and structuring themselves within the logic of
capitalist exchange.[^102]

The challenge for free/libre in transmission in a networked society is
two fold. Firstly to recognise that these ideas are more than “*‘merely
cultural’ experimentation*” in isolation and that ideas have a “*very
profound political and economic effect*.”[^103] The second challenge for
these ideas is to recognise and guard against the counterrevolutionary
responses to the effects that they have. Against the free-software
revolution came the counterrevolution of open-source. So to some extent
open-source can be considered a powerful pacific weapon, neutralising
the anti-capitalism of free/libre. Open-source networked production and
the openness that that entails has the appearance of transforming the
economic relationships of late capitalism. However in reality no such
transformation takes place as the fundamental logic(s) of communicative
capitalism remain intact.

The undecidable nature of the relationships between the hacker, who
produces abstractions, and global capital, which extracts value from
these abstractions is revealed in the cyclical adaption and cooption, of
a pattern of deconstruction and construction, between free/libre and
open-source and communicative capitalism. The positive possibility of
free/libre needs defending from the unremitting attempts at
neutralisation by neo-liberal and liberal cosmopolitan aristocrats. What
the ‘liberal aristocrats’, or as Žižek would call them, the ‘liberal
communists’[^104] who perverted free/libre into open-source “do not
understand is that in the era of biopolitical production, liberalism and
liberty based on the virtue of the few or even the many is becoming
impossible.”[^105] Hardt and Negri continue, arguing that “the logic of
private property is being threatened by the social nature of
biopolitical production.”[^106] The transformative hack (subversion) of
private property rights by free/libre philosophy recognises the social
nature of production, a point sadly missed by Hardt and Negri.

The liberal communists have vehemently adhered to the Weberian spirit of
capitalism piously accumulating wealth by the sleight of hand of
open-sourced enclosure. True to the Weberian logic, the liberal
communists demonstrate their virtue through a directed distribution of
this wealth. This ‘open philanthropy’ is not a hack like ‘open capital’,
rather it is ‘philanthrocapitalism’, an appropriation of the symbols of
open-source to extract private profit first and to ‘do good’ second. So,
while entering into ‘tactical alliances’ with the liberal communists may
be necessary in order to win local, specific, ‘subjective’ gains, as
Žižek reminds us, they are the “agents of the structural violence” of
communicative capitalism: “liberal communists are *the* enemy of every
true progressive struggle today.”[^107]

Our re-emerging *homo socialis* is able to overcome both the tyranny of
structure and of structurelessness by adopting the radical politics of
openness in social practices and institutions.[^108] The monolithic
structures of corporate bodies such as business, state agencies, and
social movements are restructured by openness. The radical transparency
of openness reveals the critical interdependency of our social
relationships. The adoption of openness for an “open-source society”
makes possible a deep public scrutiny and democratic accountability,
but, most crucially it encourages collaboration in new, better social
programmes.[^109]

The new politics configured by free/libre philosophy and the practice of
openness are an integral part of the ecology of the pro-democracy,
pro-globalisation and anti-capital networked social justice movements,
described here by David Graber:

> “This is a movement about reinventing democracy. It is not opposed to
> organisation. It is about creating new forms of organisation. It is
> not lacking in ideology. Those new forms of organisation are its
> ideology. It is about creating and enacting horizontal networks
> instead of top-down structures like states, parties or corporations;
> networks based on principles of decentralised, non-hierarchical
> consensus democracy. Ultimately, it aspires to be much more than that,
> because ultimately it aspires to reinvent daily life as whole. But
> unlike many other forms of radicalism, it has first organised itself
> in the political sphere - mainly because this was a territory that the
> powers that be (who have shifted all their heavy artillery into the
> economic) have largely abandoned.”[^110]

The free/libre hack of neo-liberal property rights presents the
possibility to re-populate the abandoned political sphere with a
politics of self-determinisation and of being in common, ‘reinventing
daily life as a whole’. The radical principles of openness present the
possibility of a lightly structured networked society, of self-governing
individuals, self-organising the movement of movements.

Notes on the production of this text
------------------------------------

My dissertation was produced using only free-software and open-source
tools. The text was written, typeset and printed using the LaTeX
document markup language. It is printed in 12pt Helvetica. My footnotes
and bibliography are formatted using the Harvard/DCU LaTeX template.

Fedora GNU/Linux

:   <span>A distribution of the GNU Linux operating system, packaged by
    the Fedora Project.<http://www.fedoraproject.org></span>

Freemind

:   <span>A free-software open-source mind mapping tool.
    <http://freemind.sourceforge.net/></span>

LaTeX

:   <span>A document preparation system, released as free software.
    <http://www.latex-project.org/></span>

TeX Maker

:   <span>A free-software LaTeX editor, released under GNU GPL.
    <http://www.xm1math.net/texmaker/index.html></span>

JabRef

:   <span>An open-source bibliography reference manager, creating BibTeX
    files for use with LaTeX. <http://jabref.sourceforge.net/></span>

BibTeX

:   <span>A tool and a file format which are used to describe and
    process lists of references in conjunction with LaTeX documents.
    <http://www.bibtex.org/></span>

Subversion

:   <span>A free-software open-source distributed version control system
    for collaboration in a networked environment.
    <http://subversion.tigris.org/></span>

Glossary of Acronyms
--------------------

ANT

:   <span>Actor Network Theory. A network sociology associated with
    Bruno Latour. See *On Actor Network Theory: A few clarifications*
    Pt.1 ((Latour 1998a)) & Pt.2 ((Latour 1998b))</span>

FSD

:   <span>Free Software Definition. “Free software is a matter of
    liberty, not price. To understand the concept, you should think of
    free as in free speech, not as in free beer. Free software is a
    matter of the users’ freedom to run, copy, distribute, study, change
    and improve the software.”
    <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html></span>

FSF

:   <span>Free Software Foundation promotes computer user freedom and
    defends the rights of all free software users.
    <http://www.fsf.org/></span>

GNU

:   <span>The GNU Project, launched in 1984, develops free software. The
    name “GNU” is a recursive acronym for “GNU’s Not Unix”; it is
    pronounced g-noo, as one syllable with no vowel sound between the g
    and the n. <http://www.gnu.org/></span>

GPL

:   <span>General Public License. A codified expression of the Free
    Software Definition, maintained by the GNU Project.
    <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html></span>

ISO

:   <span>International Organization for Standardization is a global
    network, developing and publishing technical specifications.
    <http://www.iso.org></span>

NGO

:   <span>Non-Government Organisation, used as short-hand for
    independent civil society and grassroots organisations, private
    voluntary organisations, self-help organisationsand other non-state
    actors.</span>

NSM

:   <span>New Social Movement, used as shorthand for the great diversity
    of groups in co-ordinated social change networks.</span>

WIPO

:   <span>World Intellectual Property Organisation. A specialised agency
    of the United Nations, “dedicated to developing a balanced and
    accessible international intellectual property (IP) system, which
    rewards creativity, stimulates innovation and contributes to
    economic development while safeguarding the public interest.”
    <http://www.wipo.int></span>

WTO

:   <span>The World Trade Organisation is “the only global international
    organisation dealing with the rules of trade between
    nations.”<http://www.wto.org></span>

The Open Source Definition
--------------------------

<http://opensource.org/docs/osd>

Open source doesn’t just mean access to the source code. The
distribution terms of open-source software must comply with the
following criteria:

Free Redistribution

:   <span>The license shall not restrict any party from selling or
    giving away the software as a component of an aggregate software
    distribution containing programs from several different sources. The
    license shall not require a royalty or other fee for such
    sale.</span>

Source Code

:   <span>The program must include source code, andmust allow
    distribution in source code as well as compiled form. Where some
    form of a product is not distributed with source code, there must be
    a well-publicized means of obtaining the source code for no more
    than a reasonable reproduction cost preferably, downloading via the
    Internet without charge. The source code must be the preferred form
    in which a programmer would modify the program. Deliberately
    obfuscated source code is not allowed. Intermediate forms such as
    the output of a preprocessor or translator are not allowed.</span>

Derived Works

:   <span>The license must allow modifications and derived works, and
    must allow them to be distributed under the same terms as the
    license of the original software.</span>

Integrity of The Author’s Source Code

:   <span>The license may restrict source code from being distributed in
    modified form only if the license allows the distribution of “patch
    files” with the source code for the purpose of modifying the program
    at build time. The license must explicitly permit distribution of
    software built from modified source code. The license may require
    derived works to carry a different name or version number from the
    original software.</span>

No Discrimination Against Persons or Groups

:   <span>The licensemust not discriminate against any person or group
    of persons.</span>

No Discrimination Against Fields of Endeavor

:   <span>The licensemust not restrict anyone from making use of the
    program in a specific field of endeavor. For example, it may not
    restrict the program from being used in a business, or from being
    used for genetic research.</span>

Distribution of License

:   <span>The rights attached to the programmust apply to all to whom
    the program is redistributed without the need for execution of an
    additional license by those parties.</span>

License Must Not Be Specific to a Product

:   <span>The rightsattached to the program must not depend on the
    program’s being part of a particular software distribution. If the
    program is extracted from that distribution and used or distributed
    within the terms of the program’s license, all parties to whom the
    program is redistributed should have the same rights as those that
    are granted in conjunction with the original software
    distribution.</span>

License Must Not Restrict Other Software

:   <span>The license must not place restrictions on other software that
    is distributed along with the licensed software. For example, the
    license must not insist that all other programs distributed on the
    same medium must be open-source software.</span>

License Must Be Technology-Neutral

:   <span>No provision of the license may be predicated on any
    individual technology or style of interface.</span>

Creative Commons License
------------------------

Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0
Unported<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/>

##### You are free:

to Share

:   <span>– to copy, distribute and transmit the work</span>

to Remix

:   <span>– to adapt the work</span>

##### Under the following conditions:

Attribution.

:   <span>You must attribute the work in the manner specified by the
    author or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they
    endorse you or your use of the work).</span>

Noncommercial.

:   <span>You may not use this work for commercial purposes.</span>

Share Alike.

:   <span>If you alter, transform, or build upon this work, you may
    distribute the resulting work only under the same or similar license
    to this one.</span>

For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the license
terms of this work.The best way to do this is with a link to this web
page: <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/> Any of the
above conditions can be waived if you get permission from the copyright
holder.Nothing in this license impairs or restricts the author’s moral
rights.

Bibliography
---------

Anderson, Benedict. 1991. *Imagined Communities*. London: Verso.

Appadurai, Arjun. 1996. *Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of
Globalization*. University of Minnesota Press.

Barry, Andrew. 2001. *Political Machines*. London; New York: Athlone.

Benkler, Yochai. 2006. *The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
Transforms Markets and Freedom*. PDF. NGO Education Committee of Congo.
benkler.org; Yale University Press.
<http://www.benkler.org/wealth_of_networks>.

Boomen, Marianne van den, and Mirko Tobias Schäfer. 2005. “Will the
Revolution Be Open-Sourced? How Open Source Travels Through Society.” In
*How Open Is the Future? Economic, Social and Cultural Scenarios
Inspired by Free and Open Source Sofware*, edited by Jan Cornelis and
Marleen Wynants. Brussels: VUB University Press.

Castells, Manuel. 1996. *The Rise of the Network Society*. Blackwell.

———. 2007. “Communication, Power and Counter-Power in the Network
Society.” *International Journal of Communication* 1: 238–66.

Coleman, Biella, and Mako Hill. 2004. “How Free Became Open and
Everything Else Under the Sun.” *M/C : A Journal of Media and Culture* 7
(January). <http://www.media-culture.org.au/0406/02_Coleman-Hill.php>.

Cook, Chris. 2004. “Co-Operative Corporate Partnerships - a Very British
Revolution.”
<http://www.opencapital.net/papers/cooperativecapitalism.htm>.

Dahl, Robert. 1961. *Who Governs? : Democracy and Power in an American
City*. Yale, USA: Yale University Press.

Dalton, Russell J., and Manfred Kuechler. 1990a. “New Social Movements
and the Political Order.” In *Challenging the Political Order*, edited
by Russell J. Dalton and Manfred Kuechler. Cambridge: Polity Press.

———, eds. 1990b. *Challenging the Political Order*. Cambridge: Polity
Press.

Dean, Jodi. 2004. “The Networked Empire: Communicative Capitalism and
the Hope for Politics.” In *Empire’s New Clothes - Reading Hardt and
Negri*, edited by Paul A. Passavant and Jodi Dean, 265–88. New York;
London: Routledge.

Eder, Klaus. 1993. *The New Politics of Class : Social Movements and
Cultural Dynamics in Advanced Societies*. London ; Newbury Park,
California: Sage Publications.

Frank, Andre Gunder. 1975. “Development and Underdevelopment in the New
World: Smith and Marx Vs. the Weberians.” *Theory and Society* 2 (4):
431–66.

Freeman, Jo. 1970. “The Tyranny of Structurelessness.” PDF.
<http://www.struggle.ws/pdfs/tyranny.pdf>.

Giddens, Anthony. 1990. *The Consequences of Modernity*. Cambridge:
Polity.

Graeber, David. 2002. “The New Anarchists.” *New Left Review* 13
(Jan-Feb): 61–73.

Hardie, Martin. 2005. “Change of the Century: Free Software and the
Possitve Possibility.” In *Underneath the Knowledge Commons*, edited by
Josephine Berry Slater. Vol. 2. London & www.metamute.org: Mute
Publishing.

Hardt, Michael. 2002. “Today’s Bandung?” *New Left Review*, no. 14
(March - April): 112–18.

Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. 2001. *Empire*. London: Harvard
University Press.

———. 2005. *Multitude - War and Democracy in the Age of Empire*. London:
Penguin.

Himanen, Pekka. 2001. *The Hacker Ethic and the Spirit of the
Information Age*. London; New York: Random House.

Johnson, David. 2004. “Words to Avoid.”
<http://www.usermode.org/docs/wordstoavoid.html>.

Latour, Bruno. 1998a. “On Actor Network Theory: A Few Clarifications
1/2.” *Nettime Mailing List Archives*, January.
<http://www.nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9801/msg00019.html>.

———. 1998b. “On Actor Network Theory: A Few Clarifications 2/2.”
*Nettime Mailing List Archives*, January.
<http://www.nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9801/msg00020.html>.

Lessig, Lawrence. 2004. *Free Culture*. London: Penguin.

Moglen, Eben. 2003. “The dotCommunist Manifesto.”
<http://emoglen.law.columbia.edu/publications/dcm.html>.

Moore, J. T. S. 2002. “Revolution Os.” Film.

Mouffe, Chantal. 2000. *The Democratic Paradox*. London: Verso.

Nustat, Knut G. 2003. “Considering Global/Local Relations: Beyond
Dualism.” In *Globalisation*, edited by Thomas Hylland Eriksen, 122–37.
Studies in Anthropology. London: Pluto Press.

Parsons, Wayne. 1995. *Public Policy*. Cheltenham, Glos.: Edward Elgar
Publishing.

Porta, Donatella della, and Mario Diani. 2006. *Social Movements : An
Introduction*. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Prug, Toni. 2007. “Free Software.”
<http://gold.socialtools.net/FreeSoftware.ToniPrug.Aug2007.html>.

Raymond, Eric S. 1999. *The Cathedral and the Bazaar*. O’Reilly.
<http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/>.

Rosenblatt, Gideon. 2004. “Movement as Network,” January.
<http://www.movementasnetwork.org/>.

———. 2005. “Three Pillars of Social Source : Connecting the Nonprofit
Technology Sector,” March. <http://www.movementasnetwork.org/>.

St Laurent, Andrew M. 2004. *Understanding Open Source and Free Software
Licensing*. Farnham, Surrey: O’Reilly.
<http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/osfreesoft/book/>.

Stallabrass, Julian. 2002. “Digital Commons.” *New Left Review*, no. 37
(May June): 141–46.

Stallman, Richard M. 2002. *Free Software, Free Society*. Boston: GNU
Press.

———. 2008. “GNU Project & Free Software Foundation Philosophy - Words to
Avoid.” <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/words-to-avoid.html>.

Terranova, Tiziana. 2004. *Network Culture*. London: Pluto Press.

Virilio, Paul. 2005. *The Information Bomb*. Radical Thinkers. Verso.

Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1979. *The Capitalist World-Economy : Essays*.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Waltz, Kenneth N. 1979. *Theory of International Politics*. Reading,
Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.

Wark, McKenzie. 2004. *A Hacker Manifesto*. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

Weber, Max. 1958. *The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism*.
Edited by T. Parsons. New York: Scribner’s Sons.

Williams, Sam. 2007. *Free as in Freedom*. O’Reilly.
<http://www.faifzilla.org>.

Worsley, P. 1990. “One World or Three? A Critique of the World-System
Theory of Immanuel Wallerstein.” In *States and Societies*, edited by
David Held, 504–25. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Wright, Steve. 2005. “Reality Check: Are We Living in an Immaterial
World?” In *Underneath the Knowledge Commons*, edited by Josephine Berry
Slater. Vol. 2. London: Mute Publishing.
<http://www.metamute.org/en/Reality-check-Are-We-Living-In-An-Immaterial-World>.

Žižek, Slavoj. 2006. “Nobody Has to Be Vile.” *London Review of Books*,
6th April. <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v28/n07/zize01_.html>.

Footnotes
------------

[^1]: Parsons (1995)

[^2]: Latour (1998a)

[^3]: Castells (1996)

[^4]: Appadurai (1996)

[^5]: Terranova (2004)

[^6]: Barry (2001)

[^7]: Latour (1998a)

[^8]: Understood as “if you have technology ‘t,’ you should expect
    social structure or relation ’s’ to emerge.” Benkler (2006), 11–12

[^9]: *Ibid*., pp. 11-12

[^10]: Stallman 2002, Raymond 1999 & Lessig (2004)

[^11]: Two excellent surveys of New Social Movement discourse are
    Dalton and Kuechler 1990b and Porta and Diani (2006)

[^12]: Latour (1998a)

[^13]: Latour describes the network concept as “a change of metaphors to
    describe essences: instead of surfaces one gets filaments or
    rhizomes in Deleuze’s parlance.” Latour 1998a, citing Gilles
    Deleuze et Félix Guattari, *Mille plateaux. Capitalisme et
    schizophrénie*, Minuit, Paris, (1980).

[^14]: Hardt and Negri (2001)

[^15]: After Dean (2004), *The Networked Empire: Communicative
    Capitalism and the Hope for Politics*

[^16]: After Hardie (2005), *Change of the Century: Free Software and
    the Positive Possibility*

[^17]: Mouffe (2000), 17

[^18]: Moglen (2003)

[^19]: *Ibid*.

[^20]: Dahl (1961)

[^21]: Barry (2001)

[^22]: Giddens (1990)

[^23]: Castells (1996)

[^24]: Barry (2001), 85

[^25]: Parsons (1995), 185

[^26]: The illustration used by Nustad 2003, 127 is that of a rail
    network. The physical points, rails, sleepers &tc are local to the
    viewer at the point observed yet are a part of a complex system,
    global by association to the rest of the network and to other
    transportation networks. Yet the rail network can not universal, it
    can not pass through all points.

[^27]: *Ibid.,* p.126

[^28]: *Ibid.,* p.126, emphasis added

[^29]: Such as the centre-periphery models associated with Wallerstein
    (1979) see also Worsley (1990) and Gunder Frank (1975)

[^30]: Virilio (2005), 10

[^31]: *Ibid.*, original emphasis

[^32]: *Ibid.* p. 11

[^33]: *Ibid.*

[^34]: Hardt and Negri (2001)

[^35]: *Ibid*., pp. 8-9

[^36]: *Ibid*., p. 13

[^37]: e.g. Waltz (1979)

[^38]: See Dalton and Kuechler (1990a) and Eder (1993). A more recent
    introduction to New Social Movements, including aspects of hacker
    culture which relates to the following chapters, is Porta and Diani
    2006

[^39]: See Hardt (2002) for picture of Porto Algre WSF meetings as
    *Today’s Bandung*.

[^40]: Hardt and Negri (2001), 275

[^41]: *Ibid*., p. 275

[^42]: Appadurai (1996), 31, original emphasis removed

[^43]: *Ibid*.

[^44]: Hardt and Negri (2001), 13–14

[^45]: For discussion of the Environmental movement as a network see
    Rosenblatt (2004).

[^46]: Hardt (2002), 117

[^47]: Hardt (2002), 117

[^48]: Castells (2007), 258

[^49]: I will use f/los when referring to both free/libre and
    open-source together in this paper. A more common acronym, FLOSS,
    demonstrates the genealogy of the term and its origins in computing.

[^50]: Himanen (2001), 48–53 and the prologue “Linus’s Law”

[^51]: Wark (2004), 077 There are no page numbers in Wark’s *Manifesto*,
    simply numbered points/demands. These appear in the place of page
    numbers in my references.

[^52]: Wark (2004), 076. In *Empire* Hardt and Negri argue that capital
    has a similarly expansive character. Just as the hacker sees no
    boundary to what may be hacked, capital similarly has no boundaries,
    expanding into culture, science, sex.

[^53]: Himanen (2001), 12

[^54]: Wark (2004), 036, emphasis added.

[^55]: Moore (2002)

[^56]: For Stallman, “The term “intellectual property” carries a hidden
    assumption - that the way to think about all these disparate issues
    \[copyright, patents, trademarks\] is based on an analogy with
    physical objects, and our ideas of physical property.”
    <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/words-to-avoid.html>

[^57]: Moore (2002), 9m55sec

[^58]: GNU is recursive acronym that stands for “GNU’s Not Unix”, it is,
    says Stallman “a hack” Moore (2002), 11m35sec

[^59]: See <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html>

[^60]: See <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html>

[^61]: Stallman (2002). See Williams (2007) for a critical engagement
    with FSF philosophy and Stallabrass (2002) for a review of
    Williams’s book.

[^62]: Williams (2007) Ch. 8

[^63]: Moore (2002), 15m30sec

[^64]: *Ibid.,*17m32sec

[^65]: *Ibid.,*15m30sec

[^66]: Coleman and Hill (2004)

[^67]: *Ibid.*

[^68]: See Appendix 3, The Open Source Definition and
    <http://opensource.org/>

[^69]: Raymond (1999)

[^70]: Anderson (1991)

[^71]: Quoted from IndyMedia.org homepage, accessed 24th April 2008,
    <http://www.indymedia.org/en/index.shtml>. As mentioned by Prug
    (2007), Boomen and Schäfer (2005), Coleman and Hill (2004)

[^72]: Rosenblatt (2005)

[^73]: See mySociety.org, *What’s it all about then, eh? - mySociety
    Frequently Asked Questions.* <http://www.mysociety.org/faq>,
    accessed 24th April 2008.

[^74]: Terranova (2004)

[^75]: Prug (2007) “Hackers and the Protestant ethics” and Hardt and
    Negri (2005), 301 & pp. 339-40

[^76]: After Dean (2004), *The Networked Empire: Communicative
    Capitalism and the Hope for Politics*

[^77]: After Hardie (2005), *Change of the Century: Free Software and
    the Positive Possibility*

[^78]: Dean (2004), 272–73

[^79]: Hardt and Negri (2001), 28

[^80]: Terranova (2004), 101

[^81]: Appadurai (1996), 34. See also Barry (2001) Chapter 2,
    *Technological Zones* for a discussion of the ‘content’ of
    Appadurai’s technoscapes

[^82]: Dean (2004), 285

[^83]: See Terranova (2004) Chapter 3 *Free Labour* and also Wright
    2005

[^84]: The International Organization for Standardization is
    non-governmental transnational organisation that works to globally
    normalise technical standards.

[^85]: WIPO website, *What Is Intellectual Property*,
    <http://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/>, Accessed 26th April 2008.

[^86]: Stallman (2008)

[^87]: Johnson (2004)

[^88]: Moore (2002), 17m32sec

[^89]: See The GNU Project, *What is Copyleft?*,
    <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/copyleft.html> and Creative Commons,
    *Frequently Asked Questions*, <http://wiki.creativecommons.org/FAQ>.
    Both accessed 27th April 2008

[^90]: See St Laurent (2004) Chapter 1, *Open Source Licensing, Contract,
    and Copyright Law*

[^91]: Hardie (2005), 2

[^92]: Prug (2007)

[^93]: See <http://www.opencapital.net/>

[^94]: Cook (2004), 17

[^95]: Mouffe (2000), 17

[^96]: Boomen and Schäfer (2005), 7

[^97]: Appadurai (1996), 31

[^98]: See Himanen (2001) Ch. 1 & 2 for a full discussion on the hacker
    ethic as contra the Protestant Work Ethic associated with Weber
    1958.

[^99]: Hardt and Negri (2005), 232–36

[^100]: *Ibid.,* p. 236

[^101]: Hardt and Negri (2001), 275

[^102]: See Terranova (2004), 80

[^103]: Hardt and Negri (2001), 274, original emphasis

[^104]: Žižek (2006)

[^105]: Hardt and Negri (2005), 236

[^106]: *Ibid.,* p. 236

[^107]: Žižek (2006), original emphasis

[^108]: Freeman (1970)

[^109]: Hardt and Negri (2005), 339–40

[^110]: Graeber (2002)
