---
date: "2020-03-29T00:12:34Z"
authors: [robdyke]
type: page
tags:
    - Third Year
    - New Radical Political Economy
bibliography:
    - /home/robd/projects/robdyke/goldsmiths/bibliography/globalbib.bib
meta-json: {"bibliography":["/home/robd/projects/robdyke/goldsmiths/bibliography/globalbib.bib"],"date":"","author":["Course Code PO53018A, Student No. 22164733"],"title":"Do you agree with Hardt and Negri’s contention that we now live in the\nage of Empire? Justify your response"}
title: Do you agree with Hardt and Negri’s contention that we now live in the
  age of Empire?
---
#### 

My reading of Hardt and Negri’s *Empire*[^1] has taken me on a personal
political journey. The text has provoked a critical examination of my
own politics, bringing about a new consciousness of subject and
sovereignty, of agency in a hyperglobalised world and of resistance to
global capital. To a greater or lesser degree I do support Hardt and
Negri’s contention that we now live in the age of Empire.

#### 

To justify my position of qualified agreement with these authors I will
explore the following four broad themes that emerge from the work:
global informational networked capitalism, of subject, sovereignty and
supra-nationality, of biopolitical (re)production and of political
agency for the authors’ subject of liberation, the multitude. This paper
continues in three parts. I will first consider the economic order of
Empire, examining the antagonism between the biopolitical and capital in
global society. Secondly I will examine the post-modern reformulations
of the modern political categories of state, subject and sovereignty.
The third and final section of this paper is devoted to considering what
hope there is for politics in the age of Empire.

#### 

Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri’s post-modern narrative erects a
theoretical scaffold capable of connecting with contemporary global
neo-liberal capitalism. It is an attempt to break from the teleology of
historical and materialist Marxisms, yet it is of a piece with Marxist
theory in that it is a work of political economy. As every good Marxist
will agree, the legal and political order of any given society serves
the interests of the economic order in the same. To move beyond Marx,
Hardt & Negri have drawn extensively on the work of Michel Foucault. It
is Foucault’s reunion of social reproduction, in his terms the
biopolitical, with the economic, i.e. material, base that provides the
authors of Empire with a critical concept for their analysis. In Empire
this concept is developed further, in order to engage with “the real
dynamics of production in biopolitical society.”[^2] Hardt & Negri’s
conception of Empire articulates a global legal and political order
serving the interests of global capital. Indeed, as they authors state,
“\[t\]he first task of Empire, then, is to enlarge the realm of the
consensuses that support its own power.”[^3] The key, global, concensus
is that of global capital, for it is in capital that global networked
relations are made and sustained.

#### 

With the description of the contemporary character of capitalism as
informational, leading to immaterial production[^4] I am in agreement
with the authors. ‘Communicative capitalism’[^5] and its perceived
effects; the deterritorialisation, decentralisation and destabilisation
of imperial power leading to Empire, is central to Hardt & Negri’s
argument. The great role of telecommunications and information
technologies in the transition from material to immaterial production,
from industrial production to knowledge production, can not be
downplayed. Some authors, most noteably Panitch & Gindin have criticised
this informationalist political economy for being based on relatively
recent developments in computational power and fear that this approach
exhibits a certain techno-determinism.[^6] Yet global communication
networks need not be understood so uni-dimensionally. For Hardt & Nergi
global communication networks are primarily social and symbolic before
they are technical. “The communications industries integrate the
imaginary and the symbolic within the biopolitical fabric, not merely
putting them at the service of power but actually integrating them into
its very functioning.”[^7]

#### 

How are we to understand ‘the imaginary’? The role of images, the
imagined, the imaginary in our contemporary global society, as described
by Appadurai, is helpful here. For him ‘the imaginary’ is understood as
“a constructed landscape of collective aspirations”[^8] and is crucial
to understanding the dynamics of networked global flows of people,
media, technology, money and ideology. Like the authors of Empire,
although anticipating some of their thought by a few years, Appadurai
also attempts to move beyond the essentialising epistemology of
structuralist approaches to the social world. He argues that “the
imagination has become an organized field of social practices, a form of
work (in the sense of both labour and culturally organized practice),
and a form of negotiation between sites of agency (individuals) and
globally defined fields of possibility.”[^9]

#### 

Descriptions of production under capitalism have frequently used
biological metaphors. In the imperial age both colonial plantation
labourers and urban industrial labourers were counted in units of
‘hands’. The informational economy continues this theme, now counting
‘heads’ or reckoning up ‘human capital’. From hands to headcounts the
individual is masked by the depersonalising and homogenising units of
capitalist calculation. Under contemporary informational capitalism it
is not simply the brawn of a human that labours but the brain. The
accelerated destruction of both Fordist, i.e. manual, repetitive
labouring, and Taylorist, i.e. unthinking labouring, modes of production
by communicative capitalism, that is to say the displacing of material
labour with immaterial labour, has two consequences. Firstly labour
becomes further abstracted, becoming labour power in general. Secondly,
the previously hidden dimension of affective labour, the production and
manipulation of human emotional states, now comes to the forground. This
dimension is crucial as it is within the realm of affective labour that
“social networks, forms of community”[^10] are produced and reproduced.

#### 

Three types of immaterial labour are distinguished by Hardt & Negri. The
emergence and growth of each are demonstrative of the passage to a
post-modern global economy. These are the reshaped instances of
industrial production which have embraced communication as their
lifeblood; the ‘symbolic analysis and problem solving’ undertaken by
knowledge workers, from a Chief Technical Officer to the first-tier of
call-centre support; and affective labour, the creation and manipulation
of emotional states, found above all within the service sector.[^11]
Common across each of these labour types are social-interactions
conditioned by cooperation rather than by competition, making
cooperation “*completely immanent to the laboring activity
itself*.”[^12]

#### 

The post-workerist approach of Hardt & Negri forgrounds immaterial
labour, yet clearly we are not living in an immaterial world.[^13]
However it is very important to distinguish between different modes of
labour and also to recognise previously ‘hidden’ labour, without which
the ecosystem and infrastructure of contemporary global capital would
not exist. The gendered and racist historical divisions of labour are
two such examples of hidden productive labour. A second important face
of the capitalist system exposed by immaterial labour is that of false
class-consciousness and class-divisions. The concept of immaterial
labour reunites knowledge and affective workers with the material,
manual and industrial labourers of the world presenting the chance of an
end to inter-class antagonism.

#### 

These changes at the level of the economy demand a new political theory
of value formulated to reflect the networked production of wealth and
social surpluses. These changes demand a new subjectivity, an ontology
that reflects the networked co-operative interactivity of
individuals.[^14] A new post-modern subjectivity will necessarily
displace the modern conceptions of the same and will demand a rethinking
of the related concept of sovereignty. Any post-modern reformulation of
subjectivity and sovereignty must, Hardt & Negri argue, take into
account the communicative nature of (re)production in a post-modern
global economy.[^15] I now turn to the question of how the modern
political categories of state, subject and sovereignty are transformed
in the passage into Empire.

#### 

Browning, in his critique of *Empire*, notes that for Marx, human beings
“are constituted by their social relations and capital capitalizes on
this sociality by extending networks of relations across the
globe.”[^16] Similarly, much of contemporary globalisation theory is
formed from the linking of political economy to a wider web of social
relations “to provide a comprehensive explanation of the present via
wide-ranging synchronic and diachronic analyses” demonstrating an
affinity with the grand narratives of Hegel and Marx. *Empire* replays
many of the central motifs of globalisation theory, presenting a
spatial-temporal reformulation of contemporary global society. Hardt &
Negri argue that the hyper-global inter-networked interdependence of
economic, political and legal structures diminishes the status of the
nation-state. This has the effect of deterritorialising modern notions
of sovereignty based on the concept of the nation-state. Therefore,
Hardt & Negri argue, the modern realist paradigm of international
relations is no longer adequate describe the actual global order. The
persistant, stable duality of sovereign nation-states vis-a-vis an
anarchic international arena had conditioned international relations,
both theoretically and in terms of *real politik*, throughout the
imperial age of history. Yet, in our contemporary world this duality is
defunct, for all points on the political spectrum. The radical
interconnectedness of global society demonstrates a degree of order, in
contrast to the supposed anarchy, in the international arena. This is
the point of departure for Hardt & Negri: the central “problematic of
Empire is determined in the first place by one simple fact: that there
is world order.”[^17]

#### 

In *Empire* the “standard genealogies of modern sovereignty”[^18] are
rewritten, addressing three specific problems with the ‘sovereignty
narrative’. Firstly, agency is no longer state-centric, it is now
immanent in the multitude. Second, the “intimate relation to racial
subordination and colonization”[^19] crucial to the development of
modern European conceptions of sovereignty is foregrounded, “challenging
the militant Eurocentrism of the sovereignty narrative.”[^20] Thirdly,
in rehabilitating the concept of ‘empire’ Hardt & Negri have debilitated
the normalising tendency of the modern sovereignty narrative.

#### 

However, as Laffey & Weldes argue, Hardt & Nergi’s symptoms of the
passage from modern sovereignty to the imperial sovereignty of Empire
exhibit a certain undertheorisation. These redefinitions are
insufficient to fully displace the modern sovereignty narrative. Indeed,
Hardt & Negri “remain indebted, both negatively and positively, to the
sovereignty narrative.”[^21] Firstly, although the passage to the
imperial model of Empire is not defined in “purely negative terms”[^22]
the authors of *Empire* do have a negative dependency on the decline of
modern political categories. Secondly, whilst the Eurocentrism of these
modern political categories is weakened by the concept of Empire, the
question of “what do we do about the United States”[^23] remains
unsettled: this question is crucial to many criticisms of the passage to
Empire and made all the more important in the light of US ‘imperialist’
military activity. That the US was instrumental in preparing the
“political forms and terrain of Empire” and now “sits atop the imperial
pyramid of power”[^24] that is Empire and yet is not the ‘new Rome’ is,
for Laffey & Weldes, a contradictory and unsatisfactory conclusion,
however precarious and temporary the position of hegemon in this new
paradigm of sovereignty.

#### 

According to Hardt & Negri, in “the passage from modern to postmodern
and from imperialism to Empire there is progressively less distinction
between inside and outside.”[^25] Laffey & Weldes respond with the
criticism that Hardt & Negri have not paid “careful attention to the
actual relations of rule through which European empires governed” at the
expense of the “diverse relations not explicable in terms of the simple
inside/outside logic of modern sovereignty.”[^26] In normalising Empire
as the post-modern tendency that emerges from modern sovereignty, the
former in effect legitmises the dubious constitution of the latter.
Perhaps this is the case, but what is more important here, in the
transformation of imperialism to Empire, is that the “modern dialectic
of inside and outside has been *replaced* by a play of degrees and
intensities, of hybridity and artificiality.”[^27]

#### 

This debate between our authors and Laffey & Weldes essentially comes
down to two differences. The first is in their different methodological
approaches to theorising both the state and sovereignty. *Empire* is a
post-structuralist autonomist reading of the state whereas Laffey &
Weldes emphasise a more genealogical approach. A second difference is
demonstrated in the authors different theoretical responses to
globalisation. Laffey & Weldes strengthen the state through
‘internationalization’ as a response to globalisation. Hardt & Negri, in
contrast, diminish the state to refrains of the *Internationale*.

#### 

At this point we should go back a little in order to understand the
trajectory of the *Two Europes, Two Modernities*[^28] Hardt & Negri
describe in *Empire*. The relationship between new paradigm of global
sovereignty that is Empire and the global political subject, the
multitude, is grounded in the history of struggle between capital and
labour and intertwined with the growth of the nation-states of Europe as
stable political entities. As Peter Green notes in his commentary *The
Passage from Imperialism to Empire*, Hardt & Negri “repeatedly emphasise
that the emergence of the nation-state system and ‘European modernity’
are inseparable from capitalism.”[^29] The relationship between labour,
capital and state is theorised in *Empire* as a
revolutionary/counterrevolutionary struggle. The revolutionary European
modernity “destroys its relations with the past and declares the
immanence of the new paradigm of world and life.”[^30] Hardt & Negri
continue…

> “The new emergence, however, created a war. How could such a radical
> overturning not incite strong antagonism? How could this revolution
> not determine a counterrevolution? There was indeed a
> counterrevolution in the proper sense of the term: a cultural,
> philosophical, social, and political initiative that, since it could
> neither return to the past nor destroy the new forces, sought to
> dominate and expropriate the force of the emerging movements and
> dynamics”[^31]

#### 

The revolution of the multitude declares immanence the new paradigm of
world and life. The counterrevolutionary modernity, serving the
interests of the bourgeois “poses a transcendent constituted power
against an immanent constituent power, order against desire.”[^32] That
the transcendent constituted power of the nation-state is intimately and
inextricably intertwined with capital is the principal reason for Hardt
& Negri rejecting the ‘internationalisation of the state’ that Laffey &
Weldes propose. Indeed, any anti-globalisation or anti-capital
resistance “founded on the identities of social subjects or national or
regional groups” tends towards the “*localization of struggles*” and is
rejected by our authors.[^33] The lyrics of the *Internationale*
expressed this sentiment long before Hardt & Negri:

> *There are no supreme saviours, Neither God, nor Caesar, nor tribune;
> Producers, let us save ourselves, Decree the common welfare; That the
> thief return his plunder, That the spirit be pulled from its prison;
> Let us fan the forge ourselves, Strike the iron while it is hot; This
> is the final struggle, Let us stand together, and tomorrow; The
> Internationale, Will be the human race*[^34]

#### 

The workerist hymn of the global proletariat becomes the post-workerist
hymn of the global multitude through our authors’ conceptualisation and
reconciliation of immaterial labour with material labour, uniting all
biopolitical producers. Hardt & Negri recognise in the *Internationale*
the radical response to the sovereignty of global capital: the end of
the insider / outsider division of peoples, that which was enforced by
the transcendent power of the nation-state, through a revolutionary
humanism. As capital becomes increasing pervasive as a global force, so
too must the subject of Empire, the multitude, respond, resist and
realise its unity as a global force. Empire is the response, the
counterrevolution, to proletarian internationalism.[^35] With the
continued globalisation of capital and the structures of law that govern
in its interest comes the possibility of further revolutionary change.
The deterritorialization of modernity’s structures of exploitation and
control is a positive benefit for the multitude, creating the conditions
for further - final? - liberation.

#### 

Hardt and Negri’s hope for emancipation is found in the immanent power
of the multitude, the agent with “*the will to be against Empire*.”[^36]
The figure of the multitude displaces the Marxist subject of liberation,
the proletariat, in the age of Empire through the connection of
immaterial labour with material labour, thus uniting all biopolitical
producers.

#### 

Browning is critical of Hardt & Negri’s figure of the multitude.[^37]He
argues that the “emancipatory potential of the multitude, like that of
the proletariat, is shaped by preceding diachronic conditions that have
opened up the global possibilities of freedom, while Hardt and Negri
maintain, like Marx, that the logic of emancipation precludes
determination of the course of revolutionary action.”[^38] The critical
question here is ‘what of the politics’? Browning highlights that the
“unity amidst diversity that is characteristic of \[E\]mpire and its
antagonist, the multitude, *admits no clear mode of
discrimination*.”[^39] So what does resistance, or any sort of politics
for that matter, look like in the age of Empire? Politics, social
struggle, resistance - each require objectives as a basis for action.
However, against the totality of Empire, as described by the authors,
these objectives are made parochial, any strategy self-ghettoising. Is
*Empire* anti-political as Laclau charges?[^40]

#### 

Schmitt’s expression of a modern conception of ‘the political’ is one of
the purest.[^41] His friend / enemy distinction mirrors the inside /
outside logic of modernity: each admits clear politically determined
discrimination. For Marx, as Hardt & Negri remind us, “the relationship
between the inside and the outside of capitalism’s development is
completely determined in the dual standpoint of the proletariat, both
inside and outside capital.”[^42] The relationship between the multitude
and Empire appears to be a continuation of the dialectic between labour
and capital. Yet, Hardt & Negri’s key argument is that the hyper-global
inter-networked interdependence of people and of global capital has
deterritorialised the boundaries of modernity. The radical variation in
the universal unity of the multitude and of Empire forms a mesh of
difference, a networked non-place - “the dialectic between productive
forces and the system of domination no longer has a *determinate
place*.”[^43] Remember, the “modern dialectic of inside and outside has
been *replaced* by a play of degrees and intensities, of hybridity and
artificiality.”[^44]

#### 

For Laclau this is presents serious gaps in our authors’ argument.
Firstly, the hybridity and artificiality of the multitude presents a
“proliferation of a plurality of identities and points of rupture
\[making\] the subjects of political action essentially unstable.”[^45]
How are these subjects going to articulate action when they are
radically unstable? A second criticism from Laclau is that the
deterritorialization and virtualisation central to *Empire* undermines
the political program, articulated as the rights and demands of the
multitude, put forward by Hardt & Negri towards the end of the book. He
writes that “both demands and rights have to be recognized, and the
instance for whom that recognition is requested cannot be in a relation
of *total exteriority vis-a-vis the social claims*.”[^46] The
recognition of the rights of the multitude, the fulfillment of the
demands of the multitude, the multitude becoming a political subject,
each raise questions that Hardt & Negri do not adequately address in the
book: the task of the multitude remains rather abstract.[^47]

#### 

Returning to the question of Hardt and Negri’s contention that we now
live in the age of Empire. My position is that of a qualified agreement
with the authors. With their description of a tendency towards the
deterritorialisation, decentralisation and destabilisation of the sites
and structures of power by the actions of both global capital and the
multitude around a fulcrum of counterrevolution/revolution I am in
agreement. This aspect of their argument, I find, is a compelling
explanation of our present conjuncture. To this extent then I agree with
our authors contention, demonstrated by various symptoms of a passage,
of a tendency towards an age of Empire. What concerns me, leading to my
qualified agreement, is that the relationship of subjugation between the
multitude and Empire, and the possibility of the multitude’s liberation
appears at the same time both overdetermined and undertheorised by Hardt
& Negri.

#### 

Words : 3143

Appadurai, Arjun. 1996. *Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of
Globalization*. University of Minnesota Press.

Brown, Nicholas, and Imre Szeman. 2005. “What Is the Multiude?”
*Cultural Studies* 19 (3): 372–87.

Browning, Gary K. 2005. “A Globalist Ideology of Post-Marxism? Hardt and
Negri’s Empire.” *Critical Review of International Social and Political
Philosophy* 8 (2): 193–208.
doi:[10.1080/13698230500108876](https://doi.org/10.1080/13698230500108876).

Dean, Jodi. 2004. “The Networked Empire: Communicative Capitalism and
the Hope for Politics.” In *Empire’s New Clothes - Reading Hardt and
Negri*, edited by Paul A. Passavant and Jodi Dean, 265–88. New York;
London: Routledge.

Green, Peter. 2002. “‘The Passage from Imperialism to Empire’: A
Commentary on Empire by Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri.” *Historical
Materialism* 10 (1): 29–77.

Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri. 2001. *Empire*. London: Harvard
University Press.

———. 2005. *Multitude - War and Democracy in the Age of Empire*. London:
Penguin.

Laclau, Ernesto. 2004. “Can Immanence Explain Social Struggle?” In
*Empire’s New Clothes - Reading Hardt and Negri*, edited by Paul A.
Passavant and Jodi Dean, 21–30. New York; London: Routledge.

Laffey, Mark, and Jutta Weldes. 2004. “Representing the International:
Sovereignty After Modernity?” In *Empire’s New Clothes - Reading Hardt
and Negri*, edited by Paul A. Passavant and Jodi Dean, 121–42. New York;
London: Routledge.

Panitch, Leo, and Sam Gindin. 2003. “Gems and Baubles in Empire.” In
*Debating Empire*, edited by Gopal Balakrishnan, 51–60. Verso.

Schmitt, Carl. 2007. *The Concept of the Political*. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Wright, Steve. 2005. “Reality Check: Are We Living in an Immaterial
World?” In *Underneath the Knowledge Commons*, edited by Josephine Berry
Slater. Vol. 2. London: Mute Publishing.
<http://www.metamute.org/en/Reality-check-Are-We-Living-In-An-Immaterial-World>.

[^1]: (Hardt and Negri 2001)

[^2]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 28)

[^3]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 15)

[^4]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 289–300)

[^5]: After (Dean 2004)

[^6]: (Panitch and Gindin 2003)

[^7]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 33)

[^8]: (Appadurai 1996, 31)

[^9]: (Appadurai 1996, 31)

[^10]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 293)

[^11]: Adapted from (Wright 2005, 2) and from (Hardt and Negri 2001, 30
    & p. 293)

[^12]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 294), original emphasis

[^13]: For critical ‘reality check’ on immaterial labour, see (Wright
    2005)

[^14]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 29 & p.294)

[^15]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 34)

[^16]: (Browning 2005, 196)

[^17]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 1)

[^18]: (Laffey and Weldes 2004, 128)

[^19]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 114)

[^20]: (Laffey and Weldes 2004, 128)

[^21]: (Laffey and Weldes 2004, 128)

[^22]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 13)

[^23]: (Laffey and Weldes 2004, 130)

[^24]: (Laffey and Weldes 2004, 131)

[^25]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 187)

[^26]: (Laffey and Weldes 2004, 132)

[^27]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 187–8, my emphasis.)

[^28]: (Hardt and Negri 2001 Ch. 2.1 pp. 69-92)

[^29]: (Green 2002, 37)

[^30]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 74)

[^31]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 74)

[^32]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 74)

[^33]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 44, original emphasis)

[^34]: This is the literal English translation of the second stanza,
    sourced from Wikipedia. Accessed Apr 17th 2008

[^35]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 51)

[^36]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 210, emphasis in original)

[^37]: 

[^38]: (Browning 2005, 195)

[^39]: (Browning 2005, 198), emphasis added

[^40]: (Laclau 2004)

[^41]: (Schmitt 2007)

[^42]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 209)

[^43]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 209)

[^44]: (Hardt and Negri 2001, 187–8, my emphasis.)

[^45]: (Laclau 2004, 7)

[^46]: (Laclau 2004, 9), emphasis added

[^47]: The task of the multitude became the point of departure for their
    follow-up publication, *Multitude* ((Hardt and Negri 2005)). See
    also (Brown and Szeman 2005), *What Is The Multitude?*
