---
date: "2020-03-29T00:12:34Z"
authors: [robdyke]
type: page
tags:
    - Third Year
    - Culture, Globalisation and Power
bibliography: /home/robd/projects/robdyke/goldsmiths/Bibliography/globalbib.bib
meta-json: {"bibliography":["/home/robd/projects/robdyke/goldsmiths/Bibliography/globalbib.bib"],"date":"","author":["Student Registration No. 22164733"],"title":"Critically discuss Appadurai’s theory of globalisation with reference to\nhis idea of scapes"}
title: Critically discuss Appadurai’s theory of globalisation with reference to his idea of scapes
---
Appadurai’s theory of globalisation stands out from the myriad of
theories in a number of ways. First and foremost his theory of
globalisation emphasises identity and perspective over institutions and
nation-states, the spatial and temporal over the economic and political;
in this sense Appardurai’s theory of globalisation is post-modern.
Secondly, his approach is post-structural: Appadurai is challenging
other models of social theory that are based on models of structure.
Appadurai’s theory of globalisation goes beyond the usual dualisms of
global/local relations with an account of the effect of
deterritorialisation and global cultural flows on the construction of
identity by individuals, ‘communities’ and that of the nation-state. My
discussion of Appadurai’s theory of globalisation will consider these
elements and give an account of his metaphor of *scapes*.

Before we begin, however, we must draw a distinction between theories of
globalisation and globalisation theory. Appadurai’s thesis is of the
former and represents a “spatio-temporal reformulation of social
theory”[^1] of the sort that the latter might ground themselves on.
Where accounts such as centre-periphery models associated with
Wallerstein[^2] and Gunder Frank[^3], migration theory models and the
network models of Giddens[^4] and Castells[^5] do consider time and
space, they neither emphasise these dimensions to the degree that
Appadurai does, or consider only *effective* dimensions to the exclusion
of *affective* dimensions.

Theories of globalisation/globalisation theory can be roughly divided
into system approaches and cultural approaches. Within these groups
three further categories emerge, illustrating different perceptions of
pervasiveness: sceptics, transformationalists and hyperglobalists[^6].
Theories of the former see culture as a surface phenomenon, which
demonstrates the human tendency to organise and categorise perceptions
and experience, with universal underlying ordering principles that are
the same. These principles are usually descibed in terms of binary
oppositions or dualisms: centre/periphery, micro/macro. Culturalist
approaches are also prone to binary thinking, with global/local
dichotomy used frequently. These dualisms each delinate boundaries,
objectifying a closed entity for study. And whilst deliniating political
and cultural approaches to the modern world I too have perpetuated a
dualism, the “hegemonic separation of the political and the cultural, of
the building of the state and the construction of meanings.”[^7] Where
globalisation from a cultural perspective discusses cultural
homogenisation (a loosely disguised fear of Americanisation) and
cultural diffusion, globalisation from a system perspective discusses
economic vis political themes: these are ultimately perspectives on the
same coin. Appardurai’s thesis is a challenge to this binary separation
and a call to recognise perspective.

Appadurai’s *Modernity At Large*[^8] is not explicitly a work of
political economy or political theory. His book is a challenge to the
academic discipline of anthropology to “...come in from the cold and
face the challenge of making a contribution to cultural studies without
the benefit of its previous principal source of leverage - sighting of
the savage”[^9]. He believes that anthropology must radically rediscover
its self in order to discharge its history as ‘the handmaiden of
Imperialism’ (passim). Appadurai’s perspective as an anthropologist and
his approach to the study of human social interaction shines a new light
on the topics of ‘modernity’ and ‘globalisation’ for neighboring
disciplines. His contribution to cultural studies is his idea of
*scapes*. This typology of *technoscapes, mediascapes, financescapes,
ethnoscapes* and *ideoscapes*, describes global flows of technology,
media images, finance, people and ideas, respectively.

Appadurai sees our modern world as interactive in a “strikingly new
sense”[^10] and his framework of *scapes* is an attempt to delineate and
describe the relationships of it. By *technoscapes* the sum total of
technology transfers is meant; both high and low, physical and
informational technologies. Barry’s *Political Machines*[^11] explores
the contents of technoscapes. Barry demonstrates that international
standardisation, such as ISO certifications and international
intellectual property regulation are a part of Appadurai’s technoscape
along side more conventional examples of technology; equipment and
knowledge. *Mediascapes* refer to the modern milieu of imagery and text,
distributed by new-media. A facet of Appadurai’s anthropological
approach to a theory of globalisation is identity politics, mediascapes
are deliniated distinct from other scapes due to the cultural role of
the media in the invention, or to use Appadurai’s term, the
‘imagination’ of identity. Related to to the identity function of
mediascapes, are “the dilemmas of perspective and representation”
brought about by “changing social, territorial and cultural
reproductions of group identity”[^12] that are the themes encompassed by
*ethnoscapes*. A recent example of international money flows,
Appadurai’s *financescapes*, can be seen in the ‘run’ on British bank
Northern Rock. The reselling of packaged debt from mortgages taken up by
Americans’ considered sub-prime borrowers lead to a crisis of confidence
in international money markets leaving a British bank unable to meet its
daily cash flow requirements. This caused panic amoung depositors of the
Northern Rock and required government intervention to rescue the
institution. The themes of his final scape, *ideoscapes*, are the
“elements of the Enlightenment world view”[^13]; specifically the chain
of ideas, terms, images: freedom, welfare, rights, sovereignty,
representation; that condition trans-national relations.

A criticism of this metaphor is that Appadurai does not provide an
objective account of the shape or topology of the spaces of these scapes
in contrast to other models of interactions in our modern world, models
which are frequently grounded on the empirical reality of the
nation-state. This approach - the making of what is studied into a neat
component before studying the relationships from and to it - is the
*modus operandi* of many globalisation theories. “This epistomology
which starts out with society as a given, consisting of so many closed,
bounded entities…contained entities in interaction with an equally
contained society \[was\] modelled on the state, with its clear
boundaries vis-à-vis other entities.”[^14]. Yet this is precisly where
these models fall down - their functional and reductionist primacy of
the nation-state ‘can not capture the increasing complexity of reality
in their apparatus; that is, *complex in relation to ealier
assumptions*.’[^15]

Appadurai does not take the nation-state as a bounded entity for the
(re)modeling of other entities, nor is he compressing the nation-state
from above with trans-national actors as systems models do, nor from
below with global actor agency networks, often modeled in New Social
Movement studies.[^16] Yet the nation-state is not negated by Appadurai.
He sees modernity as challenging the traditional ideas of nation states
and of national identies. Nation states and national identies need to
understand themselves in a new way, as a ‘node’ in a “complex
transnational construction of imaginary landscapes.”[^17]

Appadurai’s account of modernity is perspectival and highlights how
circumstance means that any perspective is both refracted and partial.
Nustad’s chapter in Eriksen’s *Globalisation*[^18] elaborates three
perspectives on perspectival accounts of modernity. Firstly the
distorting effects of speed and scale, a theme that Paul Virilio has
examined at length[^19], can confuse association and causation. This is
evident when considering the same event through micro and macro lenses,
or from ‘the centre’ or ‘the periphery’: the distinction is really two
perspectives on the same point. Secondly Nustad demonstrates that a
network is local at all points, global by association and yet not
universal. Nustad’s third point is that perspective can only ever be
partial, creating uncertainty.

The identity politics that figure so prominantly in Appadurai’s work
exhibit a Hegalian conception of human development, of
self-consciousness becoming self-conscious, and a strong role of the
psychodynamic in the fore-grounding of the imagination and of the
imaginary refraction and inflection of images mechanically produced and
trans-nationally distributed, of shared imagined communities, of
diaspora and other imaginary constructs, of landscapes of mediated
aspiration. “\[T\]he imagination has become” for Appadurai, an
“organised field of social practices, a form of work, and a form of
negotiation between sites of agency (individuals) and globally defined
fields of possibility.”[^20]

Time and space for Appadurai are affective on the imagination and
identity. The imagination is not a-historical, nor bound by the present;
both the future and past can be imagined and recalled. The realisation
of this imaginary dimension to time and space plays havoc with the
standard western linear chronology and significantly challenges all
paradigms based on this conception: evolution, social hierarchy,
colonisation, &tc. Identity remains related to ‘primordial’[^21]
anthropological concerns such as kinship and land. Yet the post-modern
identity described by Appadurai is also affected by imagined
trans-national flows. Identity and imagination then are crucial to the
perspectives of individuals and groups. This will inevitably lead to
*difference* in perceptions and account for *disjuncture*; the agency of
co-operation and of conflict. ‘*Disjuncture*’ and ‘*difference*’, then,
mark out the contours of *scapes* and the points at which they meet with
other *scapes*, in a given circumstance.

One approach to appraising the utility of a brace of new social
terminology such as Appadurai’s *scapes, disjuncture* and *difference*,
is to ask does it explain what it attempts to explain and, most
crucially, to what extent are existing social theories displaced by a
successful response to their long-standing problematisations. The
question for the ideas in ‘Modernity at Large’ is, then, has Appadurai
provided us with a compelling meta-narrative with his *scapes*? Does he
displace the established world-systems theories that have been useful to
us in analysing the world? Is Appadurai’s metaphor really another
macro-level world system theory and therefore open to the same
criticisms as Wallerstein and Gunder Frank as being telelogical and
deterministic?

Appadurai’s *scapes* challenge to the social sciences is to leave behind
the universalising tendencies of the dualistic conceptions outlined
above to find new ways of representing the links between the imagination
and social life, especially as the imagination is “part of the
repertoire of every society, in some culturally organised way.”[^22] As
individual identity and imagination is inspired by memes in the macro as
well as the micro, Appadurai’s *scapes* are a way of stressing the
importance of “large-scale realities in concrete life-worlds”. The
imagination is offered many visions of the world and of what is possible
in it through *mediascapes*. These include positive, empowering and
emancipatory ideas as well as the most “brutal and dehumanising of
circumstances, of harsh inequalities”. From this milleu of realities and
ideas that *come from elsewhere*, identity is imagined, “\[t\]hus,
standard cultural reproduction (like standard English) is now an
endangered activity that succeeds only by *conscious design and
political will*, where it succeeds at all.”[^23]

‘Conscious design and political will’ clearly refers to what Marxist
accounts of globalisation might describe as the power relationships that
structure circumstances and the actions of individuals and groups in
them. Power relationships are equally part of neo-liberal political
thought. Appadurai’s theory of globalisation, while describing the
multiple dimensions of identity, does not account for these power
relationships and how they might condition and dominate the identity of
individuals and groups.

Appadurai is drawing our attention to the complexity in fully fractal,
polythetically overlapping world and stressing that established
macro-metaphors and micro analysis of social theory are woefully
unprepared to examine this chaos. “…\[T\]he great traditional questions
of causality, contingency, and prediction in the human sciences” would
now be framed by Appadurai “in a way that relies on images of flow and
uncertainty, hence *chaos*, rather than on older images of order,
stability, and systematicness.”[^24] While he has not fully displaced
other social theory, his work is an “economical technical vocabulary and
a rudimentary model”[^25] which invites further development from the
social sciences.

## Bibliography

Appadurai, Arjun. 1996. *Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of
Globalization*. University of Minnesota Press.

Barry, Andrew. 2001. *Political Machines*. London; New York: Athlone.

Castells, Manuel. 1996. *The Rise of the Network Society*. Blackwell.

Eriksen, Thomas Hylland, ed. 2003. *Globalisation*. Studies in
Anthropology. London: Pluto Press.

Frank, Andre Gunder. 1975. “Development and Underdevelopment in the New
World: Smith and Marx Vs. the Weberians.” *Theory and Society* 2 (4):
431–66.

Giddens, Anthony. 1990. *The Consequences of Modernity*. Cambridge:
Polity.

Hoogvelt, Ankie. 2001. *Globalization and the Postcolonial World*.
Second. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave.

Krohn-Hansen, Christian. 2003. “Into Our Time: The Anthropology of
Political Like in the Era of Globalisation.” In *Globalisation*, edited
by Thomas Hylland Eriksen, 78–98. Studies in Anthropology. London: Pluto
Press.

Nustat, Knut G. 2003. “Considering Global/Local Relations: Beyond
Dualism.” In *Globalisation*, edited by Thomas Hylland Eriksen, 122–37.
Studies in Anthropology. London: Pluto Press.

Rosenberg, Justin. 2000. *The Follies of Globalisation Theory*. London:
Verso.

Virilio, Paul. 2005. *The Information Bomb*. Radical Thinkers. Verso.

———. 2006 (1977). *Speed and Politics*. Los Angeles, CA.: semiotext(e).

Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1979. *The Capitalist World-Economy : Essays*.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Worsley, P. 1990. “One World or Three? A Critique of the World-System
Theory of Immanuel Wallerstein.” In *States and Societies*, edited by
David Held, 504–25. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

## Footnotes

[^1]: (Rosenberg 2000, 4)

[^2]: (Wallerstein 1979; Worsley 1990)

[^3]: (Frank 1975)

[^4]: (Giddens 1990)

[^5]: (Castells 1996)

[^6]: (Hoogvelt 2001, 120–21)

[^7]: (Krohn-Hansen 2003, 81)

[^8]: (Appadurai 1996)

[^9]: (Appadurai 1996, 65)

[^10]: (Appadurai 1996, 27)

[^11]: (Barry 2001 Ch.2)

[^12]: (Appadurai 1996, 48)

[^13]: (Appadurai 1996, 36)

[^14]: (Nustat 2003, 126)

[^15]: (Nustat 2003, 126, emphasis added)

[^16]: 

[^17]: (Appadurai 1996, 31)

[^18]: (Nustat 2003, 122–37). (Eriksen 2003). I have found this title,
    *Globalisation*, from the Studies in Anthropology series, to be
    invaluable in engaging with Appadurai’s work

[^19]: For Virilio, the speed, scale and pervasiveness of modern media
    and technology detrimentally alter our perception, reducing our
    depth of vision, dissolving horizon. (Virilio 2005; Virilio 2006
    (1977))

[^20]: (Appadurai 1996, 31)

[^21]: (Appadurai 1996 Ch .7)

[^22]: (Appadurai 1996, 53)

[^23]: (Appadurai 1996, 53–55, emphasis added)

[^24]: (Appadurai 1996, 46–47, original emphasis)

[^25]: (Appadurai 1996, 47)
